SPINOZA QUOTES EXTRACTED
==================================================

Total quotes: 42

1. "Selections usually need no justifications."

2. "The object in taking the Ethics as much as possible out of the geometrical form, was not to improve upon the author's text; it was to give the lay reader a text of Spinoza he would find pleasanter to read and easier to understand."

3. "To the practice of popularization, Spinoza, one may confidently feel, would not be averse."

4. "The lay reader of philosophy is chiefly, if not wholly, interested in grasping a philosophic point of view."

5. "A continuous reading of the original Ethics, even on a single topic, is impossible."

6. "The subject-matter is coherent, but the propositions do not hang together."

7. "It is the only time, probably, dismembering a treatise actually made it more unified."

8. "Every care has been taken not to distort in any way the meaning of the text."

9. "The aim has been to give the reader a text as faithful to the original as the character of this volume would allow."

10. "White, in his translation, uses, not altogether without reason, the stilted term 'affect' instead of the natural English term 'emotion.'"

11. "'Affect' is closer to the Latin and it more clearly indicates the metaphysical status of the emotions as 'modes' or 'affectiones' of Substance."

12. "In the circumstances, therefore, I thought it advisable to change 'affect' to 'emotion' and 'affection' to 'modification' or 'mode.'"

13. "I also corrected White's translation of the Definition of Attribute by deleting the word 'if.'"

14. "The very slight and very occasional internal changes I have made-other than those already accounted for-I have indicated by square brackets."

15. "Spinoza's courage and strength of mind are as impressively manifested in the constant daily life he lived as in the few severe crises he resolutely faced."

16. "The frugality of his life bordered on asceticism."

17. "All his free time and energy Spinoza dedicated with unusual single-hearted devotion to the disinterested development of a philosophy he knew would not be very acceptable to the general or even special philosophic reader."

18. "His mode of life is all the more remarkable because it was not determined by embittered misanthropy or passionate abhorrence of the goods of the world."

19. "It was dictated solely by what he understood to be, in his circumstances, the reasonable life for him."

20. "He believed, too, that it is part of the wisdom of life to refresh oneself with pleasant food and drink, with delicate perfumes and the soft beauty of growing things, with music and the theater, literature and painting."

21. "Spinoza's relations with the humble folk he stayed with exhibited the modesty and grace of character that endeared him to his intimate friends."

22. "Spinoza lived the ethics he wrote."

23. "As is the Ethics, so is his life pervaded by a simple grandeur."

24. "Spinoza sought in his lifetime neither riches, nor sensual pleasure, nor fame."

25. "He wrote and published his books when he could and thought advisable because part of his joy consisted in extending, as he said, a helping hand to others, in bringing them to see and understand things as he did."

26. "He was animated by no missionary zeal."

27. "He was content to search for the truth and to explain what he found as best he could."

28. "The truth, he devoutly believed, would make us free."

29. "But it was truth that we understood, not truth that was forced upon us."

30. "Spinoza has often been likened to the old Hebrew prophets."

31. "He does not, it is true, exhort the people to follow in the path of righteousness; it is the philosopher's task simply to show the way."

32. "Spinoza's philosophy has suffered not a little from the highly abstruse and technical form in which the Ethics is written."

33. "Spinoza did not, however, choose the geometrical order because he thought his philosophy too profound for ordinary exposition; nor did he choose it because he was enmeshed in medieval philosophic speculation."

34. "He chose it because his fundamental philosophic aim was to establish ethics on a thoroughly tested, scientific foundation."

35. "Man, Spinoza held, is a part of Nature, and Nature is governed by eternal and immutable laws."

36. "Spinoza's belief in the self-sufficing, lawful order of Nature, and the adequacy of the natural powers of our mind to understand the mysteries (popularly so appraised) of heaven and earth, the singular expository style of the Ethics emphasizes in unmistakable fashion."

37. "Even for our understanding of God's own nature, Divine Revelation, as commonly interpreted in Spinoza's day and our own, is wholly unnecessary."

38. "We need only the revelation afforded by the natural powers of reason operative in us."

39. "In geometry, we do not blindly accept conclusions on faith, nor do we reject them by authority."

40. "We are guided in our discovery of the true and the false, solely by the light of our natural understanding."

41. "The truths we discover are not temporary fabrications of the human mind, but eternal truths about the nature of things."

42. "The central controlling idea of Spinoza's philosophy is that all things are necessarily determined in Nature, which he conceives to be an absolutely infinite unified and uniform order."

