What Is a Language?
1.0 The meaning of “meaning”
There would be no languages if there were no expressions (words, phrases, sentences, etc.). Nothing meaningless is an expression. ) For this reason, the concept of an expression must be understood in terms of the concept of meaning, the same therefore being true of the concept of language.
But it isn’t much use to be told that words and sentences “have meanings,” since the word “meaning” has three different meanings, and only one of these directly relates to the nature of language.
    Incidentally, it’s often said that there are linguistic expressions that are meaningless. Chomsky famously said that “colorless green dreams sleep furiously” is both meaningless and is a bona fide sentence, and therefore expression, of English.  
   This reasoning is no good. Depending on how it’s interpreted, “colorless green dreams sleep furiously” either says (i) that there are dreams that are green and also colorless that sleep furiously, in which case it’s false, or it says (ii) that there is nothing that is a colorless green dream that doesn’t also sleep furiously, in which case it’s vacuously true. 
     We’ll develop this line of thought in Section 1.4. In the meantime, we’ll operate on thje assumption that nothing meaningless is a linguistic expression. Right now we’ll identify the three different meanings of the word “meaning” and we’ll identify the sense in which linguistic expressions are meaningful.
Meaning #1: The evidential meaning of “meaning”
In some cases, to say that x “means” y is to say that x is evidence of y—that x and y are causally interrelated in such a way that, given x, it can reasonably be inferred that y. “Smith’s hacking cough means that he has a violent lung infection” means “Smith’s hacking cough is evidence that he has a violent lung infection.” And the latter means that coughs like Smith’s are causally connected to violent lung infections in such a way that it may reasonably be inferred that Smith has a violent lung infection.
Smith’s violent lung infection is a cause of Smith’s hacking cough. But for x to be evidence to of y, it is neither necessary nor sufficient that y cause x. Why isn’t it necessary? First of all, causes can be evidence of their own effects. (Bill’s current drunkenness is evidence of a poor performance on his upcoming economics exam.) Second, if some event or state of affairs z is a cause of both x and y, then x can be evidence of y without being a cause or an effect of y. (Suppose that Bill is slurring his words. This is evidence that he’ll do poorly on the upcoming test. But his slurring his words is neither a cause, nor an effect, of his substandard test-performance. His drunkenness is a cause of (a) his slurred speech and (b) his imminent, substandard test-performance. And it’s because his slurred speech has a causal ancestor in common with his poor test-performance that the former is evidence of the latter.)Why isn’t it sufficient? Given only that the cause of Bill’s failing was that he was drunk, we can’t infer from the fact that he failed that he was drunk. There are many reasons why a person may fail a test. Supposing that y caused x to occur, x is evidence of y only if it can’t reasonably be supposed that anything other than y was the cause. (Only a violent lung infection could be responsible for Smith’s hacking cough, that being why the latter is evidence of the former.)
Meaning #2: The psychological meaning of “meaning”
When we use sentences, we mean things by them. Meaning in this sense is a psychological notion. You tell me that Sally is the most wonderful, decent person you’ve ever known. I respond by saying “things aren’t always as they seem.” What I mean is that Sally is devious. In other words, my intention in making this statement is to say that Sally is devious. Given that intentions are psychological entities, meaning in this sense is obviously a psychological notion.
Meaning #3: The linguistic meaning of “meaning”
The sentence “snow is white” says something about something; it attributes the property of being white to snow. Therefore, it means that snow is white. This kind of meaning is in a class by itself; it isn’t identical with either of the two kinds mentioned so far; and there isn’t any obvious way to understand it in terms of them. Let us now say why.
Meaning in the psychological sense involves, but does not coincide with, meaning in the linguistic sense. Once again suppose that, in response to your telling me that Sally is a wonderful person, I say “things aren’t always as they seem.” My meaning—what I’m trying to get across—is that Sally is devious. But in my attempt to get this across, I’m taking advantage of the fact that “things aren’t always as they seem” has an existing (linguistic) meaning. My meaning that Sally is devious is parasitic on my utterance’s meaning that things aren’t always as they seem. Meaning in the psychological sense is therefore parasitic on meaning in the linguistic sense.
1.2 Why Meaning #3 ≠ Meaning #2
Some philosophers and linguists have held that for:
(1) “snow is white”
to mean that snow is white is for it to be the case that, in uttering “snow is white,” what people mean is that snow is white. This view, duly generalized, is that for a sentence S to have meaning M is for it to be the case that, in uttering S, people to mean M.
This position is false. There are many sentences that have determinate meanings even though they’ve never been uttered before and, therefore, no one as of yet has ever meant anything by them. The sentence:
(2) “the cube root of three is Sir Lawrence Olivier’s favorite irrational number between one and four”
has a determinate meaning, even though that sentence never probably has been uttered. Thus, meaning in the linguistic sense is not in all cases identical with meaning in the psychological sense.
But a stronger point is warranted. Let’s say that P1 and P2 are the propositions meant by (1) and (2), respectively. In saying that (1) means P1 and that (2) means P2, we are not using the word “means” equivocally. Both occurrences of “means” in the last sentence denote the same relationship. Thus, the relationship that (1) bears to its meaning is the same as the relationship that (2) bears to its meaning. Given that, as we saw, (2)’s having P2 for its meaning isn’t identical with P2’s being what people mean in uttering (2), it follows that (1)’s having P1 for its meaning isn’t identical with P1’s being what people mean in uttering (1). Of course, what we just said about (1) and (2) can be said of any other sentence. So even if what people mean in uttering a given sentence happens to coincide with its literal meaning, what it is for sentence S to have proposition P for its literal meaning isn’t for people to mean P in uttering S.
Psychological meaning presupposes linguistic meaning. What a person means when uttering a given sentence is a function of, among other things, his beliefs as to what that sentence already means. You must believe that “snow is white” means snow is white if, intending to speak sincerely and literally, you say “snow is white” with the intention of getting it across that snow is white. If you think that “snow is white” means grass is green, you cannot, if your intention is to speak sincerely and literally, believe that “snow is white” means snow is white.
Of course, you could know full well what “snow is white” in fact means, but use that sentence to get across something that has nothing to do with the color of snow. Knowing what “snow is white” actually means, you might utter that sentence with the intention of getting it across that the government is controlling our thoughts with alpha waves. And, depending on the circumstances, that could be precisely what an utterance of that sentence would convey.
But whatever the message is that, in uttering a certain sentence, you wish to convey, you must believe that message to have some kind of relationship to the one meant by that sentence itself. Furthermore, if you are to succeed in saying what it is you wish to say, what you believe to be meant by the sentence you are using must be right. If, intending to speak sincerely and literally, you say “snow is white,” thinking that it means bananas are yellow, you will fail to say what you wanted to say.
Thus, setting aside defective utterances, one cannot, in uttering a given sentence, mean anything by it unless one knows what it already means. So meaning in the psychological sense is parasitic on meaning in the linguistic sense, and the two kinds of meaning are therefore entirely distinct.
1.3 Why Meaning #3 ≠ Meaning #1
The sense in which “snow is white” means that snow is white isn’t comparable to the sense in which smoke means fire. The fact that smoke means fire has nothing to do with conventions on the part of human beings. But the fact that “snow is white” means what it does is, at least in part, a matter of convention. It’s a matter of convention that “snow” doesn’t refer to grass and, therefore, that “snow is white” doesn’t mean that grass is white; it’s a matter of convention that “white” doesn’t mean green and, therefore, that “snow is white” doesn’t mean that snow is green.
Although the whiteness of snow sometimes causes people to say “snow is white,” it doesn’t do so in the way that fire causes there to be smoke. Fire happens; smoke happens as a result. The presence of smoke doesn’t embody any judgment about anything. But, when caused by the whiteness of snow, utterances of “snow is white” do embody judgments of various kinds. People see or otherwise come to believe that snow is white; and, since they know the relevant linguistic rules, they know that, were they to say, “snow is white,” they judge that they’d be making a correct statement. Thus, utterances of “snow is white” embody judgments about the color of snow and about how, linguistic conventions being what they are, one can report the color of snow. Also, people don’t say everything that occurs to them. Before deciding to utter a given sentence, people typically make context-based judgments about the appropriateness of uttering that sentence. So various judgments—about snow, about language, and about human psychology—are involved in the causal connection between the whiteness of snow and a given gerson’s saying “snow is white.” There is thus a normative dimension to language use that is absent where purely natural, non-conventional cause-effect relations are concerned.

1.4 Are there meaningless expressions? 
No. But many an author thinks otherwise. There are three reasons for this.  

(i) There are expression-like entities that, given their phonetic properties along with facts about the linguistic environments in which they occur, are easily mistaken for bona fide expressions. Given what the words flanking it are and what it sounds like, the occurrence of “blerko” in  “sometimes a blerko can be a man’s best friend” is likely to be mistaken for an actual word. But it has no meaning and is thus no word.  

(ii) There are meaningful sentences that express propositions that, for whatever reason, aren’t worth affirming. “Colorless green dreams sleep furiously” says, absurdly, that there are dreams that are both colorless and green, all of them furious sleepers. Because we wrongly see sentences with absurd meanings as having no meaning, we wrongly categorize such sentences as having no meaning. 

(iii) Oftentimes, a homonym of an actual word occurs in a context in which no semantic rule assigns any meaning to it and in which it therefore means nothing, even though the context in question is one that is otherwise just like a sentence. What occurs in “the absolute is one” is not the word “absolute”, but a mere homonym of that word. For the occurrence of “absolute” in “the absolute is one” to be a word, there would have to be some semantic rule that assigned it a meaning. Although there are semantic rules that assign meaning to homonyms of that occurrence, that occurrence per se is assigned no meaning. Anything that is assigned no meaning is ipso facto not a linguistic expression. So “the absolute is one” is not a sentence, but a sentence-imposter. 666 
2.0 Sentences as proposition-isomorphs
The meaning of a true or false sentence is a proposition. Propositions are not themselves sentences. That is why different sentences (e.g., “schnee ist weiss” and “snow is white”) can express the same proposition.
Propositions, when true, are truths. Thus, propositions have existed as long as there have been truths; which means that they’ve existed as long as there has been anything and, consequently, that propositions are not creations of human creations.
Though distinct from the sentences that express them, propositions are structurally similar to them. Two otherwise dissimilar sentences can share the word “John.” “John loves Mary” and “Sally punched John” are two such sentences. The meanings of those sentences obviously have something in common corresponding to the fact that they share the word “John.” Since they share no other constituents, the thing meant by “John” must be capable of moving on its own from sentence-meaning to sentence-meaning. This would not be the case if the thing meant by “John” in the proposition meant by “John loves Mary” were incapable of being disengaged from the things meant by “loves” and “Mary.” It follows that propositions consist of discrete parts; it also follows that those discrete parts correspond to discrete parts of the sentences that express them. Taken together, these two points entail that sentences are structurally like the propositions they express.
2.1 Propositions as digital structures
Given that propositions consist of discrete, isolable entities, it follows that, like sentences and unlike visual perceptions and photographs, propositions are digital structures. The sentence “Sally punched Bob” has a unique decomposition into a certain “minimal units of significance,” or “morphemes,” these being “Sally,” “Bob,” etc. Given what we said in Section 2.0, it follows that something similar is true of the corresponding proposition. Sentences and propositions are digital structures, meaning that they have unique breakdowns into minimal significant units.
A visual perception of Sally punching Bob doesn’t have a structure comparable to that of “Sally punched Bob” or any other sentence. Unlike sentences, perceptions don’t have to decompose into minimal significant units. Visual perceptions, unlike sentences and propositions, therefore have a non-digital or analogue structures. Given that at least some thought involves the processing of perceptual information,  it follows that thought 
at least sometimes has a structure very different from language. (See Section 5.4 for further discussion of this.) The nature of propositions is discussed in Chapter 3.
3.0 The three branches of the philosophy of language: syntax, semantics, and pragmatics
The study of language is typically divided into three sub-disciplines—semantics, syntax, and pragmatics. In addition to denoting a branch of linguistic study, each of these three words denotes dimension of language. So “semantics” refers to a certain discipline and also to a feature of expressions, the same being true of the other two expressions.
