Religions vs. Cults 

What is a religion? A sanitized, rationalized cult; a cult that has become respectable; that has been absorbed into society; that has become part of the economy; that has the same financial and legal commitments as any other institution; that has been institutionalized and bureaucratized into near-lifelessness: in a word, a near dead cult. So it isn’t cults that are degenerate religions; it is religions that are degenerate cults: degenerate precisely because they are so non-degenerate relative to all the usual rationality-based benchmarks and because, therefore, they are so lacking in the one thing—call it “spiritual vitality”, for lack of a less definite term—that sets religions apart from garden-variety institutions, such as the Department of Motor Vehicles.  

What is a cult? 

So the real question is: What is a cult? The obvious answer is: A cult is a case of collective person-worship. The “collective” qualification is crucial. If Sally worships Charles Manson and nobody else does, that is not a cult. And if 100 different individuals worship Charles Manson, and they all do so independently of each other, that too is not a cult: that is essentially 100 different love-affairs; it is not a single institution and is therefore not a cult.  But there does exist a cult if 100 individuals worship Charles Manson and they police each other to perpetuate the cycle of Manson-worship. 
And this answer (“a cult is a case of collective person-worship”) is extensionally correct (or at least approximately so: see below), meaning that x is a cult if, and only if, x is a case of collective person-worship. But now we need answers to questions about this answer, and the first such question is: What is it to worship something? 

Worshipping x ≠ Holding x in high regard 

To worship something is not merely to acknowledge that it has great power. A hypothetical: I believe that Charles Manson is extremely intelligent, extremely capable, etc. This does not believe that I worship him; it doesn’t even mean that I idolize him. Of course, if I know that he is so formidable, I will conduct myself accordingly; but being worshipful of a given thing is not the same thing as making due allowances for its strengths. To be sure, my being worshipful of Charles Manson would seem to entail my believing him to have some virtue or other (e.g. intelligence) to an extreme degree; but the entailment does not go in the opposite direction. 
The situation doesn’t change if I believe that Charles Manson is superhumanly intelligent, capable, etc. A hypothetical: I believe that Charles Manson is not just extremely intelligent but several orders of magnitude more intelligent than any other person. (“Intelligent” can serve as a stand-in for any other virtue we might wish to impute to him.) I still don’t necessarily worship him. Another hypothetical: It turns out that Superman (or someone with his abilities) exists—that there exists someone who can fly, has x-ray vision, etc.  I find out about this: and I do so through the normal methods; I see this Super-person in action, or I learn about his super deeds through reliable channels. Do I worship this entity? Not necessarily. If I am a normal human being, I am probably envious; if I am a rational human being, I am probably fearful, at least depending on what else I know about him. 

To worship x = To regard x as supernatural 

Importantly, “superhuman” is not the same as “supernatural.” My believing that Charles Manson is supernaturally intelligent (or strong or what not) would seem to entail my being worshipful of him—as opposed to merely duly cognizant of his strengths. 
But there are a few points to make in response to this. First, “supernatural” is not the same as “extreme” or even “extremely extreme.” Somebody who can run 30 mph is extremely fast. Somebody who can run 50 mph is superhumanly fast—but not supernaturally so. It doesn’t make a difference how fast he can run: if he can run 500 mph, he is superhumanly fast, but not supernaturally so. But what if he can exceed the speed of light? If I knew that someone could exceed the speed of light, I wouldn’t conclude that was supernaturally fast; I would conclude that, contrary to what I thought, the laws of nature don’t prohibit things from exceeding the speed of light. 
To be clear: If the data warrants my believing that some person (let’s call him “Max”) can exceed the speed of light, and for that reason and that reason alone I believe Max to be able to exceed the speed of light, then I don’t believe that Max is supernaturally fast. “But suppose you hold your beliefs about the laws of nature fixed”, it might be objected, “and you believe that Max can exceed the speed of light: in that case, surely, you do believe that Max is supernaturally fast.” But that supposition is incoherent; for if I believe the data to warrant such a position, then I ipso facto believe it to warrant rejection of the position that nothing can exceed the speed of light. 

Worshipping x → One’s high regard for x not to answerable to data

I cannot have reasons, not even bad ones, for judging someone to be supernaturally fast, or supernaturally intelligent, or supernaturally anything. I can have reasons for believing that someone is so intelligent that I must have previously been wrong about the laws of nature; I can even have reasons for believing that someone is so intelligent that, although I was otherwise right about the laws of nature, they break down in this one case. But as long as my beliefs represent data-models—or even beliefs about the limits of such models--I cannot believe that anything is supernaturally anything. This holds even if my attempts to model data lead me to hold that something has some attribute to such an extreme degree that, if only in that one context, there are no coherent data models to be had.
Relatedly, the difference between “supernatural” and “superhuman” is not one of degree. Smith believes that Charles Manson is superhumanly but not supernaturally intelligent; and Jones believes that Manson is in fact supernaturally intelligent. Jones doesn’t necessarily attribute more intelligence to Manson than Smith does. It may even be that, as both Smith and Jones know, Smith attributes more intelligence to Manson than Jones does.   

Worshipping x → One’s high regard for x not to answerable to data


The relevant difference lies not in what they believe but in why they believe it. Setting aside ratiocinative errors on Smith’s part—setting aside issues relating to the fact that Smith is not an infallible ratiocinator and he therefore can make mistakes when it comes to modeling data--Smith believes that Manson is intelligent only as long as the data warrants it and only to the extent that the data warrants it: if new data shows that Manson is not intelligent, then, ratiocinative errors aside, Smith will stop believe that Manson is intelligent; and if the data suggests that Manson is intelligent in way X but not in way Y, then, same qualification, Smith will believe that Manson is intelligent in way X but not in way Y. For Jones, the situation is very different. Jones’ views concerning Manson’s intelligence are likely to have initially had a basis in the data; but Jones’ views as to the scope and extent of Manson’s intelligence are grossly out of proportion to what the data warrants, and Jones’ belief in Manson’s intelligence will be disproportionately slow to respond to new data shows that belief to be false. And these errors—if we wish to call them that—are not of the garden-variety ratiocinative variety; they cannot be chalked up to mistakes on Jones’ part in modeling the relevant dataset; rather, they are to be chalked up to, as Jones sees it, the irrelevance of that dataset. 

x is worshipped → x is a fiction

What this indicates is that Jones is not so much responding to Manson’s intelligence as he is projecting it. To establish this, let us consider a clear-cut case of projection: a fictional character. Mr. Spock has certain characteristics: he’s intelligent, quasi-telepathic, he has pointy ears, he is half and half-human, and so on. What data do we need to support our “belief”, for lack of a better word, that Spock has these characteristics. None, obviously, since he is a posit, a construct---a projection. This does not mean that debates about Spock are necessarily misconceived. We can meaningfully debate whether he is as fluent in Vulcan as he is in English; about the extent to which being half-Vulan has shaped his character; and so on. We can have such debates since certain ways of resolving these debates will cohere better with our suppositions about him. But we cannot question our foundational suppositions concerning him, since those suppositions must be granted if there is to be a Spock for there to be questions about.  
