Determinism, implementation-indeterminism, and the nature of natural laws

 Determinism  defined

Determinism: The doctrine that how the world is at any point in time fixes how it will be at all later times.
Indeterminism: The doctrine that determinism is false. Equivalently, the doctrine that there is some point in time t such that, for some later time t*, how the world is at fails to determine how the world is, in every respect, at t*.

  The world is deterministic to the extent that it is law-governed. Supposing that the state of the universe at t determines the state of the universe at later time t*, that is because there are laws of nature L1 Ln such that, given the state of the universe at t, there is exactly one way the universe can be at t*.
  The world is deterministic to the extent that it is predictable, but it is not predictable to the extent that it is deterministic.
  If there are no laws, and thus no deterministic mechanisms, that link the present to the future, then the future is ipso facto open, i.e. there are many ways it can be, and predictions cannot be made.
  But supposing arguendo the world is deterministic, it doesn t follow that it is completely predictable. Setting aside human fallibility, there are a two reasons why determinism doesn t entail complete predictability.

  The first reason why determinism doesn't entail complete predictability: Interference effects
  In order to learn about the world, one must interact with it. If I am to learn about another person s mental states, I must ask him questions. But if I am ask him questions, I will change his mental state. If I ask a non-paranoid person  are you paranoid? , he may well, for that very reason, become paranoid. If I want to learn about the bats that live in a certain cave, which is pitch black, I must enter the cave, which will disrupt the bats, and I must use a light, which will further disrupt the bats.
    But aren t these problems capable of being sidestepped?", it will be asked. "Suppose you know when the bats sleep, and you know the layout of the cave, and are thus able to walk around in it without making too much of a ruckus. In that case, surely, you can observe the bats without bothering them or, in any case, without disrupting them in a way that prompts them to behave in ways that are not their natural wont? And suppose that I want to learn about a given person s feelings. If I establish an empathic rapport with him, so that he trusts me, I can ask him whether he s paranoid without inducing paranoia in him? 
  The fact that such precautions must be taken shows that, at any given time, what one can learn about the world is quite circumscribed; that if it s impossible to know X at time t, it may be possible to learn about X at later time t*. But the thesis that the universe is completely predictable requires that, for any time t, it is possible, at t, to predict how, for any later time t*, the universe will be at t*.

Laplace s Thesis

    But Laplace s thesis," it will be objected, "is that a creature of infinite intelligence could predict how things will be. 
  Prediction requires both intelligence and knowledge, and there is no conceivable being that acquire complete knowledge of the state of the universe at any point in time.
  If one is to have a sense-perception of a given thing, there must be an information-bearing causal process linking that thing to oneself. I can hear you talking because the movements of your vocal chords create airwaves in which the structures of those movements are encoded and which then induce structure-similar disturbances in my eardrums. In order to learn about the subatomic world, one must irradiate it, i.e. flood it with light or otherwise bombard it with radiation of some kind or another. But because light is composed of particles (photons) whose masses are comparable to those of the particles that the microphysicist aspires to learn about, the effect of flooding the microphysical world with light is to change it utterly. If you use a flame thrower to learn about a school of rodents, you will succeed up to a point: their charred remains will give you tell you a lot about them: but it won t tell you everything. Where rodents are concerned, fortunately, we do not, in our efforts to learn about them, have to flood them with radiation that damages them so. But where microparticles are concerned, we are not so fortunate.
  And if there were causal processes that were sufficiently fine-grained that we could learn about some of the microstructures of which the causal processes at our disposal leave us ignorant, it would still be impossible to learn about the microworld. The very existence of such fine-grained processes would guarantee that. For how would we learn about those processes? By hypothesis, the most fine-grained, least disruptive processes at our disposal would be those very processes. But if we would disrupt such processes if we tried to learn about them by using them.
  The reason I can see you without changing you is that, compared to you, photons are very small. But photons are not small compared to photons; and, whatever parts this hypothetical, super-fine-grained causal process consists of, those parts are not small compared to themselves, limiting what could be learned about such parts. If, in order to see you, I had to flood you with objects that were as massive as you are, I couldn t learn much about you. By parity of reasoning, supposing R to be the most undisruptive, fine-grained sort of causal process in existing, there would only be so much one could learn about R by using R.
  It being inherent in the nature of sensory knowledge that it involve a causal connection between subject and object, there is no conceivable being that could have complete knowledge of the microstructure of the world. Therefore, nothing could have complete knowledge of the conditions obtaining at t, for any time t, or, consequently, at any later time t*, given that knowledge of the future is necessarily based on the knowledge of the present.
Knowledge of the future=
Knowledge of initial conditions+knowledge of laws+
  The knowledge yielded by making the inferences warranted by the first two kinds of knowledge.

Why the existence of the unknown must be granted
  George Berkeley, Ernst Mach, C.S. Peirce, A.J. Ayer, all make the following point: the following point:  Supposing that such and such facts are inherently unknowable, then why grant their existence? By supposition, they might as well not exist, even if they do. So why not redefine the term  the world  in such a way that what falls within its scope includes only what can be known after the operations by which knowledge of it is obtained have been carried out?
  One fact which falls within the scope of science is that, in order to learn about the world, we must interact with it. Another such fact is that interactions have effects. These two facts entail that what we can learn about the world at time t doesn t correspond with perfect precision to the world at time. Given that two facts that do fall within the scope of science entail that there are things about the world that cannot be known, it follows that, for science no less than for metaphysics, the world is to some extent unknowable.
  Also, we can know that situations of a given kind obtain without there being any one such situation of whose existence we are aware. There has never been a single photon of which any person was aware; but we know that photons exist, since, if they didn't, the photoelectric effect could not be explained.

  Second reason why determinism doesn't entail complete predictability: No way to predict how knowledge will grow
  No creature can possibly predict what it will come to know. Suppose you know now, at time t, that, during the next 20 years, you will learn truths t1 tn, and no other truths. In that case you now know t1 tn and they therefore aren t what you will learn in the next 20 years. If we replace t1 tn with any other list of truths, the result is the same. Therefore, it is possible to know now what you will know later. Given that what you know affects what you do, and thus affects how the world is, it follows that no creature can know exactly what it will do or, therefore, exactly how what it will do will affect the world.

Supervenience
  If x and y are identical in respect of their microphysical properties, then it is inconceivable that they should differ in respect of their biological properties.[20] Wherefore, the biological supervenes on the microphysical. In general, one class of facts supervenes on another class of facts exactly if there can t be a change in the former without there being a change in the latter but not vice versa.

Supervenience?identity
  Given two pieces of clay that are identical in respect of their strictly physical properties (e.g. their shapes, masses, etc.), it is inconceivable that they should differ in respect of their aesthetic properties. But aesthetic properties cannot be identified with physical (physics-related) properties.
  First of all, two objects that are physically different can be aesthetically identical. Given only that x and y differ in their chemical composition, their masses, their degrees of conductivity, etc., it doesn t follow that they differ in their aesthetic properties. The aesthetic is thus multiply realizable with respect to the physical. The same is true, for the same reasons mutatis mutandis, of the biological.
  The biological is thus variable with respect to the physical. A biological mechanism of a given kind can be implemented by entities that are physically very different from one another.
  Software is variable with respect to hardware. Software-identical systems may be hardware- distinct. (But hardware-identical systems cannot be software distinct.) Software-realities therefore supervene on hardware realities.

Psychological supervenience difference from other kinds of supervenience
   It is said that the mental supervenes on the physiological: given two creatures that are physiologically identical, it is impossible that they should differ psychologically.
  Supposing this true, the way in which it is true is very different from the way in which it s true that biological supervenes on the physical. It is incoherent to suppose that two entities that are microphysically identical should differ biologically.
  By contrast, it is not incoherent, though it is counternomic, to suppose that two physiologically identical creatures should differ in respect of their psychological properties.

Bound by physical law? explained by physical law
  Nothing can violate the laws of physics. There are no mass-energy displacements that are not governed by the laws of physics. For this reason, many have thought that everything (everything spatiotemporal, that is) can be explained in terms of the laws of physics.
  Spurious reasoning for a false conclusion. The statue is not identical with the clay of which it consists. They have different modal properties (one can destroy the statue without destroying the clay); so the clay isn t identical with the statue. (The clay constitutes the statue; constitution isn t identity.)
  By parity of reasoning, computers aren t identical with heaps of atoms. The laws of physics tell you how those atoms behave. They don t tell you anything about the computer. The laws of physics don t say anything about computation, storage space, etc. Those concepts (computation, etc.) don t exist as far as those laws are concerned. So a physics-omniscient being does not in virtue of that fact have any computer-specific concepts and therefore does not have any computer-related knowledge.
  Two software-identical units may be physically very different. So given only that x and y are software-identical, nothing can be said about their respective physical realizations. Consequently, there is no way to map software-truths onto hardware-truths.
  But can t it be said that x and y will resemble each in certain abstract, functional respects? 
  Yes, but physics is blind to such similarities. The similarities in question are to be understood in terms of concepts (e.g. computation, recursion, algorithm) for which the laws of physics make no provisions.[21]

Software-determinism? statistical determinism
  Suppose that a given computer x has a deterministic program. ( x has a deterministic program = there exists a set S of inputs such x, when not malfunctioning, assigns no more than output to any given member of S. ) Computers break down, and there is thus  machine error.  Should this happen to x---should x sometimes fail to say  4  when asked  what is twice two? --- the conclusion to draw is that x isn t implementing its program, not that its program is indeterministic. To the extent that x is a computer---to the extent that x is something that implements a program---x is a deterministic system. It is only to the extent that x is failing to implement a program that x is indeterministic. So it s only to the extent that x isn t a computer that x is indeterministic.

Implementation-determinism? program-determinism
Where higher-order laws are concerned, determinism?statistical determinism.
  Given only that biologically identical inputs may be followed by biologically distinct outputs, it doesn t follow that the laws (if any there be) of biology are  indeterministic  or  probabilistic.  What follows is either that those laws are indeterministic or that organisms imperfectly operationalize their biological programs. Given only that economically identical situations may lead to economically distinct situations, it doesn t follow that the laws of economics are statistical. And so on.
  Correlatively, lower-order indeterminism?higher-order indeterminism. Supposing that the laws of physics are indeterministic, it doesn t follow that higher-order laws are indeterministic. Supposing that x1 xn are indeterministic with respect to the laws of physics, it doesn t follow that they are indeterministic with respect to this or that biological/computational/etc. program.
  Supposing arguendo that the laws of microphysics are indeterministic, it doesn t follow that aggregates of microparticles behave indeterministically, for the reason that the various norm- non-compliant behaviors on the part of individual particles cancel one another out.

Probability in relation to higher-order mechanisms
   Let W1 and W2 be two universes satisfying the following conditions. In each, the very same laws are operative. In each, the microphysical laws are indeterministic. In each, the fact that those laws are indeterministic has the consequence that it is very unlikely that computers (or cars or any other large-scale device) will always do what it is supposed to do: given those laws, it is unlikely, in either W1 or W2, that every computer will always comply with its program and will never, as a result of machine-error, produce an input-inappropriate output. But in W2, by sheer coincidence, every computer always does what it is supposed to do. Moreover, in W2, every computer does what it is supposed to do even though, inevitably, every computer eventually breaks down: those computers that break down simply happen, by sheer coincidence, to produce program-compliant results, even though, their hardware-conditions being what they are, it is unlikely that they should do so.
  In W2, the likelihood that a given computer will behave in a program-compliant doesn t exceed the likelihood that a given computer in W1 will do so: the two probabilities coincide. But in W2 the previously-described rash of coincidences obscures the deterministic, and therefore that probabilistic, structure of events. In W2, it seems, in consequence of those coincidences, that computers are 100% likely to behave in a program-compliant fashion 100% of the time, even though, in fact, it is not 100% likely---even though in fact their always behaving in a program- compliant fashion is almost 100% unlikely (granting that their usually behaving in a program- compliant fashion is 100% likely).

Statistical trends reflective of, but distinct from, probabilities
  The Frequency Theory of Probability (FT) tells us that, in W2, the probability of a computer s never malfunctioning is 100%; in any case, the FT tells us that the W1-likelihood of computer- error exceeds the W2-likelihood.
  This is plainly false. In each universe, the likelihood of computer-error is the same, even though, in W1 the likelihood seems high and, in W2, the likelihood seems low and even though, according to FT, the first likelihood in fact exceeds the second. What is going on is that, in W1, the statistics are consistent with the deterministic-probabilistic structure of the operative laws, whereas in W2 they are not; so that, in W1, the statistics lead one to the right result, whereas the statistics fail to do so in W2.

Evidence of probabilities vs. actual probabilities
  Statistics are evidence of probabilities; statistics are not themselves probabilities. According to FT, statistics are identical with probabilities; therefore, FT is false. Also, statistics are only as truth-conducive as they are consistent with the causal mechanisms that generate them. If, by coincidence, the statistics should be out of line with the underlying causal realities---if, by sheer coincidence, not one person who smokes gets cancer or emphysema---then the statistics simply aren t good evidence of the relevant mechanisms or, therefore, of the relevant probabilities.
  In a world governed by the same biological---and non-biological laws as ours, but in which by sheer coincidence smokers never got cancer/emphysema, doctors would be no less wrong than they would in our world to tell their patients that smoking was harmless. In such a world, it would be understandable, given the available evidence, that doctors should take the view that smoking was harmless: but that view would be no less wrong than it is here, and the probability, in that world, that a given smoker would succumb to cancer/emphysema would coincide with the corresponding probability in our world.
   Assume that M is brand-new and that it is well-constructed. Bearing this in mind, consider the statement that:

(L) The likelihood that M will respond to a given input with an appropriate is high, but not 100%.

  Let W be a world in which, by coincidence, computers always behave in a program-compliant manner but which, within the limits set by that qualification, is otherwise just like our universe. In our world, the likelihood that a brand-new PC will behave in a program-compliant manner is close to, but short of, 100%.
  If FT is right, then the probability in W of a computer-malfunction is 0%, even though the actual probability is obviously the same as the corresponding probability in our universe and is therefore greater than 0%.

Conclusion of Chapter 7
  When it is said that that probability of a computer-malfunction is greater than 0%, the statement being made is to be interpreted causally, not statistically. What is being said is that, the laws of physics being what they are and the construction of the computer being what it is, it is a possibility, albeit one that may never be actualized, that brand-new/well-constructed/etc. computers malfunction.
