 This sound is easily imitated and often is imitated, usually in comedic contexts. In any
case,  this  sound,  with  its  distinctive  lack  of  resonances  has  to  do  with  the  bureaucrat’s
impoverished emotional architecture: the missing resonances correspond to the emotional gaps—
the dead zones or empty spaces—within the bureaucrat’s psyche.                      Psychopaths are Rogue Bureaucrats              And Bureaucrats are Non-rogue Psychopaths


      The  reason  psychopaths  can  pass  lie  detector  tests  is  that  psychopaths  don’t  believe
anything. So they don’t have to lie. In the psychopath, rationalizations have replaced beliefs. In
other words, what it is convenient to believe has replaced what is actually believed. So nothing is
believed. But certain propositions are accepted, as long as it is convenient to accept them.
      The bureaucrat does not believe anything. But he accepts certain propositions because the
bureaucracy that employs him requires him to accept them. In other words, he accepts those
propositions because it is convenient to accept them.
      Thus, in the bureaucrat, what it is convenient to believe has replaced what is actually
believed. Rationalizations have replaced beliefs. Institutional pseudo-reality has replaced actual
reality.
    So what is the difference between the bureaucrat and the psychopath?
      Ultimately,  there  is  no  difference.  But  so  far  as  there  is  a  difference,  it  is  this:  the
bureaucrat is part of an organized collective of psychopaths, whereas the so-called psychopath is
not a part of such a collective. So the psychopath is a rogue bureaucrat, and the bureaucrat is a
non-rogue psychopath.
    But  if  the  bureaucrat  were  removed  from  his  host-institution  and  were  not  quickly
embedded  in  another  bureaucracy,  his  behavior  would  immediately  become  that  of  the
psychopath. The bureaucrat’s appearance of propriety and decency is just that—an appearance.
There is nothing there: the bureaucrat is just as amorphous and insubstantial as the psychopath,
but he has the external reinforcement of an institution. So it is this external reinforcement that
gives the bureaucrat’s character any semblance of legitimacy or cohesiveness. And he knows
this. He knows that, without this external reinforcement, he would turn into a protoplasmic blob
of  amorphous  sub-humanity.  So  he  knows  that  he  has  to  march  in  lock-step  with  his  host-
institution, lest he turn into such a blob.
      Thus, the bureaucrat depends not just for his income but for his very identity on his
following rules and protocols.                        How Double-think is Possible?


      How is double-think possible? How is it possible for a person to have a given belief at
one time and then believe the opposite a moment later? The answer: It isn’t possible.
    But double-think is possible?
    So how is that possible? How can double-think be possible if it is not possible to shift
freely between opposed and incompatible beliefs?
    It is possible because double-think is about not believing anything.
      Double-think is not about shifting between veritable beliefs. It is about shifting between
institutionally or socially mandated acceptances that are in some respects functionally similar to
beliefs but are not beliefs.
      Who  is  it  that  engages  in  double-think?  Bureaucrats.  Bureaucrats  are  the  ones  who
engage in double-think.
      And what is a bureaucrat?
      Someone who believes whatever his institutional tells him to believe.
    In  other  words,  someone  who  believes  nothing.  Someone  who  has  no  beliefs  at  all.
Someone  who,  although  he  doesn’t  believe  anything,  nonetheless  pretends  to  have  certain
beliefs, depending on what the institution in question requires of him.
    But so far as a person is able to engage in double-think, it is because he doesn’t believe
anything.
    So far as a person is able to keep track of his various lies, it is because, underneath his
lies, there is a core of veritable beliefs. But in the bureaucrat, this core of true belief has been
infiltrated by double-think. Since double-think is to real belief what plastic flowers are to real
flowers, this means that the bureaucrats ability to believe anything has been rotted out. And this
in turn means that the bureaucrat’s agency has been rotted out, agency being the ability to decide
for oneself what to think and do. This is because in order to decide for oneself what to do one has
to have beliefs as to how one ought to act. And if one cannot have beliefs, then one cannot have
beliefs as to how one ought to act. And if one cannot have beliefs as to how one ought to act, one
cannot act. One can only engage in reflexive pseudo-actions.
      And this is the bureaucrat’s situation: it isn’t that the bureaucrat isn’t doing what he
knows he should do. It is that he doesn’t know anything, since he doesn’t believe anything, and
he therefore can’t do anything. When the bureaucrat says that his ‘hands are tied’, he is telling
the truth. The truth is that his hands are tied: he can’t do anything at all.
    Of  course,  when  the  bureaucrat  says  ‘my  hands  are  tied’,  he  is  claiming  that  the
institution is not letting him act as he wants to do. But the truth is that he can’t do anything. He
can only reflexively respond to institutional dictates.
    So is isn’t that the institution isn’t letting him do such and such. It’s that the institution
hasn’t ordered him to do such and such. For the bureaucrat, there is no difference between being
allowed to do such and such and being required to such and such. This difference exists only for
people who can decide for themselves what to do, and the bureaucrat has no such ability.               Bureaucratic Bloat Responsible for OCD-spike


      When I was a graduate student, I gave a paper to one of my professors to look at. I still
half-believed that my so-called ‘professors’ were in fact professors, as opposed to the arch-
bureaucrats that they proved to be (and that I already semi-consciously knew them to be). When
he and I were discussing my paper, he would refuse to weigh in on any statement that fell outside
of his artificial so-called ‘specialization.’ He would say: ‘ah, you’d have to ask so and so about
that: you see, he’s the philosophy of mind expert in the department; my specialization is meta-
ethics.’  In  fact,  he  wouldn’t  even  reference  so  and  so  by  name;  he  would  just  point  in  the
direction of his office. It was the most utterly cowardly and small thing one could imagine. And
it is artificial and absurd in the extreme to hold, as this professor did, that within a discipline like
philosophy, there could legitimately exist such rigidly mutually exclusive sub-discipline or that
intellectual  labor  could  with  any  legitimacy  be  subdivided  in  a  way  that  validated  such
subdivisions.
      And  this  professor’s  ‘work’  for  lack  of  a  better,  like  that  of  everyone  else  in  the
department, was a mere caricature of actual intellectual work, as it had been completely drained
of meaning and realness by submission to the just-mentioned institutional, bureaucratic protocols
that were masquerading as legitimate intellectual or scientific protocols.  
      There is a psychology professor at Harvard, by the name of Howard Gardner, who claims
that  intelligence  is  subdivided  in  the  seven  rigidly  defined  mutually  isolated  types:  verbal,
musical mathematical, social, etc.
      This  is  radically  absurd  as  well  as  destructive  in  the  extreme  of  human  intellectual
potential.  One  mark  of  truly  intelligent  people  is  that  they  are  able  to  reinvent  themselves
intellectually—that their intelligence, though functionally encapsulated, at least within limits, is
able to migrate about  and embody itself in new aptitudes, nay, in aptitudes that are not even in
the same discipline, or even in some cases in the same kind of discipline, as the aptitudes that
preceded them.
      And I know this from my own case. I was told that I was a moron. Then after reinventing
myself—or simply being placed in a new environment that triggered intellectual development---I
was told, either by a person or a test-score, that I was genius of such and such a kind, but that I
was moron of thus and such a kind. Then, after another such revolution had occurred, I was told
that I was moron in such and such a respect but a genius in thus and a respect. And so on.
    My abilities were changing; I was acquiring new ones and letting others lie fallow. But
what was happening was that a core of intelligence was putting on new hats and taking off old
ones; it wasn’t that there was rigid pre-determined intellectual template that my intelligence was
doomed to inhabit; it was that I was in fact intelligent and, owing to changing exigencies and to
changing incentive and disincentive-structures, my intelligence was repositing itself in different
skills and interests and, indeed, intelligences.
      When a person sustains damage to a certain part of his brain, the functions previously
discharged by that brain-center will come to be discharged by other brain-centers. To some
extent, those other brain-centers are merely performing analogues of that function; in some cases,
however, to at least some degree, they seem to be assuming the very same function. In any case,
it is clear that intellectual recovery, and intellectual growth in general, depend on intelligence’s
being able to migrate around, from module to module. This is clear, I stress, both in casesinvolving brain-damage and also in cases, such as my own, of garden-variety intellectual growth.
      And Howard Gardner’s theory automatically rules out all of that growth as impossible.
And it thereby strips educational and psychiatric institutions of any reason to recognize it, and it
gives  them  every  possible  reason  to  deny  it  when  it  happens  and,  therefore,  to  thwart  the
corresponding cases of intellectual growth.
      Gardner’s  theory  is  a  pitiful  and  brazen  rationalization  of  rigid  and  artificial  purely
institutional  sub-divisions---of  bureaucratic  divisions  of  labor—that  have  only  the  most
superficial  correspondence  to  facts  about  the  structure  of  intelligence.  But  educational  and
mental health-related institutions can certainly do quite enough to thwart intellectual growth in
people as to make it seem as though Gardner’s pseudo-theory is correct.  And I refer to it as a
pseud-theory  because  that  is  what  it  is:  it  is  a  bureaucratic  action  that  is  dressed  up  as  a
psychological theory, with ruinous consequences.
      And this is why OCD is on the rise. OCD has always has existed; that much is clear,
given what a well-defined constellation of symptoms it involves.  But OCD has definitely been
on the rise in recent years.
      Why is this?
      OCD  is  what  happens  when  one’s  acceptance  of  legalistic,  logical  or  pseudo-logical
protocols  is  used  to  tamp  down  one’s  emotions---one’s  aggression,  one’s  sexuality,  one’s
vitality. And a spreading educational and legal bureaucracy—which is supported by fake experts,
as  Howard  Gardner,  with  their  fake  and  undermining  theories,  such  as  Gardner’s  theory  of
intelligence---are  making  it  increasingly  difficult  for  people  of  great  potential,  and  of
correspondingly strong passions, to discharge those passions in a way that is constructive or,
indeed, that is anything other than blind rage. And this rage is filtered through internal legalistic
and pseudo-logical protocols that mirror the institutional protocols of the educational system in
which the person in question is trapped. So, yes, there has been a rise in OCD. And that rise is in
lock-step  with  the  spread  of  cancerous  educational  and  professional  bureaucracies,  and  it  is
exacerbated  by  Howard  Gardner-style  theories,  which  are  nothing  but  a  broken  educational
bureaucracy’s rationalizing itself.  
    To  sum  up:  More  bureaucracy  equals  more  suppressed  rage.  More  suppressed  rage,
coupled  with  half-acceptance  of  bureaucratic  protocols,  equals  rage  that  is  expressed  in  the
distinctively, bureaucratically repetitive and detail-oriented way that is the hallmark of OCD.        Submitting to Feminism Makes It More Psychopathic


    A psychopath is someone who does not have a functioning superego, and psychopathy is
the  condition  of  not  having  a  functioning  superego.  The  main  difference  between  men  and
women is that men have internalized superegos and women have externalized superegos. A
man’s superego is a relation between that man and himself. A women’s superego is a relation
between that woman and other people. A woman’s superego cannot function autonomously; it
cannot function unless it is given external reinforcement. And that reinforcement comes from the
internalized superegos of the men in her life. For a woman, manly, firm, and morally centered
men are the very embodiment of conscience. Therefore, when men are not manly or firm or
centered, and when instead they are weak and effeminate and uncentered, women’s superegos
have no external reinforcement and thus become defunct.
      Here is a concrete way of thinking about this. Suppose that Smith is the President of your
country. If there is a national crisis, and Smith responds by being indecisive and weak and
effeminate, then the country will rightly become irate; and it will respond either by disintegrating
into a condition of nation-level psychopathy or it will replace Smith with somebody who is
strong and centered and decisive. In other words, if that country is to avoid degenerating into a
condition of psychopathy, it must replace its current weak and effeminate leader with a real and
therefore manly leader. And the reason for this is that, although an effeminate person can have
conscience, such a conscience is not self-contained; in order to function, an effeminate person’s
conscience depends on some other conscience. Therefore, in contexts where there are no true
men, there are no functioning consciences, and the result is a condition of complete psychopathy.
      Consequently, when a self-described feminist woman is being hysterically psychopathic,
the  worst  way  to  respond  is  by  attempting  to  appease  her  or  by  submitting  to  her.  Her
psychopathy is a product of the absence of a functioning male conscience in her life. And if you
respond  to  her  in  a  weak  and  submissive  manner,  you  are  showing  her  that  you  lack  a
functioning conscience, in consequence of which her psychopathy will rage on. In fact, it will
rage on even more virulently than before since, now that she has discovered that you have no
conscience, she has discovered there to be one less functioning superego in the world to resist
her own lack of a functioning superego.
    By contrast, if you are firm, manly, and centered, then you are giving her superego the
needed reinforcement of a functioning superego, in consequence of which her superego will then
become operational.
      Being  firm  does  not  mean  being  violent.  Being  violent  is  a  way  of  being  weak  and
effeminate, just as being submissive is a way of being weak and effeminate. Being violent and
being submissive are two sides of the same feminine coin. The appropriate way to act is like a
man: firm but not violent, decisive but not rigid, and principled but not judgmental. If men acted
in this way, then even the most psychopathic and hysterical of feminists would begin to act with
genuine integrity. In a way, the feminist woman’s psychopathic hysteria is her petulant and
childish way of asking men to be men and therefore to take control, just as the misbehavior of a
young boy is his way of asking his father to be a father and therefore to be a source of structure
and discipline.              What is the Prognosis for People with OCD?


      Somebody on Quora.com asked the following question:
      What is the prognosis for patients with Obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD)?
      Here is my answer:
      People who have OCD have it because it provides them with relief from anxiety—from
anxiety so intense as to be almost inconceivable to people who have not had OCD. But OCD is
just a defense-mechanism. And as is the case with most defense-mechanisms, there comes a time
in the subject’s life when it starts to do more harm than good. At that point, the obsessive-
compulsive has to make a decision: What do I want? Do I want mere freedom from anxiety? Or
do I want to live and grow? It is 100% up to him what he chooses. If he chooses to grow, he will,
and his OCD, without exactly vanishing, will assume productive forms. If he chooses not to
grow, he won’t.
      OCD, though an affliction, is ultimately a voluntary one. If the obsessive-compulsive
chooses to remain in his defensive bubble of isolation from the world, then his OCD will defeat
him. If he chooses to re-engage the world, then his OCD will assume non-pathological and in
fact productive forms, as it did with Beethoven and Einstein.
      OCD,  though  an  affliction,  is  an  affliction  of  the  will—and  is  thus  unlike  cancer  or
asthma, which have nothing to do with the integrity of one’s will. And OCD is eliminated, or at
least made to assume adaptive forms by duly exercising one’s will in growth-oriented ways.
      The  symptoms  of  OCD  are  involuntary  only  in  a  relative  sense.  Relative  to  a
determination to remain within his defensive bubble of non-engagement, there is nothing much
that  the  obsessive-compulsive  can  do  about  those  symptoms.  He  can  engage  in  a  bit  of
‘cognitive-behavioral therapy’, but the effects of such therapy will be shallow and short-lived,
absent a determination on the obsessive-compulsive’s part to grow and change himself in a way
that makes his OCD irrelevant. On the other, if he does choose to leave his defensive bubble and
re-engage the world, then, indeed, his OCD will become irrelevant. So relative to a determination
on his part to re-engage the world, the symptoms of OCD are voluntary.
    So ultimately OCD is indeed voluntary, and if one sees it for the voluntary condition that
it  ultimate  is,  then  the  prognosis  is  100%  positive.  But  if  one  sees  it  as  a  garden-variety
pathology, then the prognosis is negative. A garden-variety condition is one that does not afflict
one’s will and that falls outside the scope of the one’s will. OCD is an affliction of one’s will; it
is a weakening of one’s will, in consequence of a withdrawal from the world. And by choosing
to go back out into the world, the obsessive-compulsive strengthens his will and causes one’s
OCD to assume benign if not productive forms.        The Way to Beat OCD is to Have a Purpose in Life


      Charles Manson’s followers gave him everything: money, sex, labor, drugs, adoration.
And what did give them? Nothing. Or almost nothing. He gave them one thing---and it was the
most important thing of all: a purpose. He made them believe that they were part of an important
cause. A person with a cause and no money has almost everything. A person with all the money
in the world and no cause has almost nothing. And Manson gave his minions a cause, and they
gave Manson everything else.
    Jim Jones’ followers gave him everything. They provided him with slave labor. They
barely slept. And at least until the last few months, they did all of this voluntarily. And what did
Jim Jones give his followers? Nothing. Or just one thing—he gave them a sense of purpose. He
gave them a cause that was their own.
      These were profoundly evil men—consummate manipulators. But it was for that very
reason that they knew exactly what people need. If they hadn’t known as much, they couldn’t
have been such successful predators. And what people need, as these two knew, is a purpose.
      People will put up with pain and strife if they have a purpose. And they won’t if they
don’t.
      Getting rid of OCD is hard. If a given obsessive-compulsive has a purpose in life that his
OCD is preventing him from fulfilling, then he will get over his OCD. Otherwise he won’t. OCD
is simply too painful to get rid of unless one really has to. And one really has to if, and for the
most part only if, OCD is interfering with one’s purpose in life.
    But there is deeper connection between having a purpose in life and getting rid of OCD.
OCD is about having a bifurcated psychological structure. It is about being of two minds—not
having a single hegemonic set of values to which all psychical activity is subordinate and, for
this reason, not having any way of resolving the internal conflicts that are wrenching one’s
psyche apart.
    If one has a grand purpose in life, one has a way of resolving these conflicts; for if one
has a master plan to which everything else in one’s mind, including one’s internal conflicts, are
subordinated, in which case these conflicts can and will be resolved. And therewith one’s OCD
will go away. If one has no master plan, there is no way to resolve one’s internal conflicts. And
except in the unlikely event that those internal conflicts simply fade away, one’s OCD will
persist.
      The good news is that one wouldn’t have OCD in the first place unless one did have
some grand purpose in life, the reason being that OCD is what happens when one is estranged
from  one’s  own  purpose.  OCD  is  about  alienatedness  from  one’s  true  self  and  one’s  true
purpose, and the way to get over it is to find that purpose and actualize it.                                  Is OCD a Disease?


      When a condition is described as a ‘disease’, it is usually implied that the person who has
it cannot simply ‘will it’ away. That person may be responsible for getting it, as is the case with
someone  who  get  lung  cancer  because  of  smoking,  but  once  has  it,  so  is  it  assumed,  his
continuing to have it is not about his simply failing to make the right effort of will.
      Given that OCD very clearly is an illness of sorts, it seems to follow that someone who
has OCD is ‘stuck with it’, in the way in which someone who has lupus or asthma is simply
stuck with it—that, although his condition may be treated, as asthma can be treated, and even
eliminated, it is not a question of simply willing it away.
    But here is the problem: OCD, though indisputably a disease, is a disease that afflicts the
will itself. It is an affliction of the will. A person with osteoporosis is somebody with porous
bones, not a porous will. A person with cancer is somebody with damaged cells, not with a
damaged will. But somebody with OCD is somebody with a damaged will. And the only way to
fix a damaged will is by exercising that will. And that is what the obsessive-compulsive must do.
And if he doesn’t do that, he is quite as responsible for his condition as is a fat person who
refuses to stop overeating.
      Let me put these points into context.
      People with OCD can be willful---in fact, they are categorically so—and they can also, in
some  contexts,  be  legitimately  highly  determined—in  fact,  they  are  unusually  likely  to  be
capable of being determined to an exceptionally high degree. But in other respects, their will,
though functional, has been ruptured: their will is like that of an exceedingly strong person who
has pulled a muscle: that person is still strong and, in some context, can exercise that strength—
but his ability to exercise his strength is more much context-dependent than it would be if he
didn’t have a ruptured muscle.
      Somebody with OCD is somebody whose psyche has been bifurcated into two a Dr.
Jekyll half and  Mr. Hyde half—into an id-half and a superego-half. And these two halves are at
war with each other: the bestial, criminal side of the obsessive-compulsive wants to come out,
but the angelic morality-driven side won’t let it; so the criminal side has to leak out in symptoms.
And, in any case, the paralysis of will that is the hallmark of OCD is the result of a stalemate
between these two sides.
    But at the end of the day, it is entirely up to the obsessive-compulsive what he does. He
isn’t like a paralytic who simply can’t move; he is somebody who, although he can exercise his
will, won’t. He won’t because of the anxiety he will experience. But he still can. If he were
offered a million dollars, he would, regardless of the anxiety.
    To  be  sure,  the  obsessive-compulsive  is  diseased;  he  does  have  a  very  real
psychopathology. But his being diseased consists not in his being unable but rather in his being
unwilling to do the right thing. And getting over OCD involves strengthening the obsessive-
compulsive’s atrophied willingness to act; and the way to strengthen it is to get him to act—first
a little, then a lot.
    That  is  not  all  there  is  to  getting  over  OCD:  the  conflicts  underlying  the  obsessive-
compulsive’s  paralysis  of  will  must  be  addressed.  But  in  order  for  them  to  be  addressed
meaningfully,  they  must  be  accompanied  by  veritable  doing  on  the  part  of  the  obsessive-
compulsive. The purpose of the psychoanalytic interpretations must be to direct the will—toindicate pathways that it should follow—but unless it actually follows those pathways, those
analytic constructions will be so much theory. And psychoanalysis is not about theory; it is
practice: it si about getting the patient out of the bubble of his mind, which, ultimately, can only
be done by doing it.                          Social Anxiety is about Rage


      People who have social anxiety don’t want to be around people. And they don’t want to
be around people because they hate people, or at least are angry at them.
      And notice that the effect of social anxiety is to keep the person who has it away from
people. When he is around people, he is upset. When is alone again, he stops being upset. He
tells himself that he fears others. And there is a certain truth in this. But really it is more that he
fears that he might do them; he is afraid of the danger that his own anger towards others might
put him in.
    In this respect, social anxiety is similar to shyness. Shyness is ultimately about intense
rage towards others. This becomes immediately obvious to anyone who has actually entered into
serious communication with a shy person: what becomes clear---because they explicitly affirm as
much—is how intense their hatred is of others.
    In any case, people with social anxiety are not necessarily wrong to hate people. People
with social anxiety are often highly intelligent and sensitive people who are misunderstood by
others and have been wronged by them. So it is not necessarily incumbent on someone with
social anxiety to change his views or feelings about others. But if he wants to function in society,
it is incumbent on him to recognize why he has social anxiety. And once he acknowledges that
he has it because of anger, his anger will become conscious. And once it becomes conscious, he
can  put  it  in  its  proper  place.  When  anger  is  unconscious,  it  widens  its  target;  it  spreads
indiscriminately, and people become the object of it who would otherwise be targeted by it. But
when anger becomes conscious, it is confined to its rightful target--to the specific individuals
who have wronged on---instead of being inappropriately applied to all people.
      There are two ways for someone with social anxiety to get over it. The first is to acquire
power. Hatred is about impotence, and it tends to vanish as one acquires power. The second is to
accept that one has anger towards others and not to take oneself to task for it. Instead of beating
oneself for one’s misanthropic tendencies, one should accept them and draw strength from them.
Much great accomplishment is the result of misanthropy that has been consciously accepted and
then duly sublimated.                                    Structural Therapy


      The  preferred  way  of  treating  OCD  these  days  is  known  as  “cognitive  behavioral
therapy.” CBT be called “behavioral therapy” since there is nothing cognitive about it, as it
consists  entirely  in  changing  the  obsessive-compulsive’s  behavior  directly,  and  not  way  of
changing the emotional conflicts responsible for his behavior.
      Obviously, the obsessive-compulsive’s behavior does have to be changed; indeed, getting
him to become at least minimally functional, and therefore getting him to not be completely
crippled by his compulsions, is a prerequisite for him engaging in any sort of meaningful therapy
or, indeed, in his having a meaningful life.
    But taken by itself, behavior modification is not enough. Indeed, behavior modification,
unless supplemented by treatment of underlying emotional disturbances, fails of its own purpose,
as in, it fails even to modify behavior, since those emotional conflicts will always find new ways
of pathologizing behavior.
      The only real way to treat OCD is through structural therapy. Structural therapy is the
process of changing the obsessive-compulsive’s mentality from that of someone who is reality-
avoidant, and therefore fantasy-oriented, to being someone who is reality-oriented, and therefore
fantasy-avoidant.  The  obsessive-compulsive’s  obsessionality  is  about  his  preferring  symbolic
representations of reality to reality and, consequently, his preferring thought to action. And his
compulsions are merely externalized obsessions and therefore represent overt expressions of his
reality-avoidance.
    In  order  to  effect  this  change  of  orientation  within  the  obsessive-compulsive,  it  is
necessary to modify his behavior; and cognitive behavioral therapy is therefore a component of
structural  therapy.  But  it  is  a  subordinate  component,  the  main  component  being  the  just-
described reversal in the obsessive-compulsive’s mentality.          Effective Therapists Must Have and Project Inner

                                        Strength


    I  recently  joined  linked  in,  and  I  immediately  connected  with  a  number  of  OCD-
therapists,  all  of  whom  claimed,  in  their  about  me  sections,  that  they  were  looking  for
opportunities to broaden their therapeutic horizons and learn more about OCD. And I reached
out  to  them,  telling  them  to  check  out  m  website,  OCD  and  philosophy  and  give  me  their
feedback. And I invited a few to do podcasts with me, in which I would give them a chance to
discuss their views. Not one responded meaningfully; they all responded by saying ‘thanks!’, and
nothing else. In other words, they hit the auto-reply ‘thanks’ button at the bottom of the message.
      And  when  I  took  a  second  look  at  them,  I  saw  that  they  were  timid  looking,
unadventurous, cautious and scared people. Not bad people, by any means. But not people who
projected strength; not people whose presence suggested that they had ever overcome anything;
not focused or centered people. But rather people who living life defensively, playing by a pre-
existing rule-book, and just trying to keep their heads above water.
      And that is understandable. But it means that as OCD-therapists, their batting rate is
going to be zero. The essence of any therapeutic relationship is confidence on the patient’s part
in the therapist; it is belief, in the competence and integrity, on the part of the analysand in the
analyst. The analyst’s words affect the analysand by way of the rapport that exists between them,
and that rapport is based on the analysand’s confidence in the analyst. And if that confidence
isn’t there, the analyst’s words are not going to mobilize restorative energies within the patient.
The analyst will retain the power to hurt the patient with his words, but he will not be able to do
much in the way of helping the patient.
      Psychoanalysis  and  psychotherapy  are  not  exercises  in  computation.  Obviously,
intelligence and knowledge on the part of the therapist can help enormously; but they help only
on the condition that there is an empathic rapport through which they can help. And the essence
of that rapport is a belief—or a feeling that is deeper than belief—on the patient’s part in the
analyst’s  power  to  heal.  And  that  belief  will  be  possible  to  sustain  only  if  the  analyst  is
somebody who not only talks the talk but walks the walk.  And a few meaningless degrees and
certifications will not suffice. There is a singularity of outlook the therapist must have if he is to
help the patient, and there is no way he can have such an outlook unless has conquered his own
demons. And it seems to me that many a so-called mental health ‘expert’ is an expert only in
getting through credentialing programs that are exercises in evading one’s demons and in failing
to acquire just the sort of inner strength that is the cornerstone of any effective analyst’s practice.            Reading-related Difficulties in People with OCD


      People  with  OCD  are  generally  unusually  intelligent,  and  they  tend  to  do  well  on
standardized  tests,  especially  tests  of  reading  comprehension.  But  OCD  often  makes  it
extraordinarily difficult for such people to read. When reading, their obsessionality flairs up:
they have to ritualistically re-read words or phrases—not because they don’t understand what
they’ve  read,  but  because  their  OCD  compels  them  to.  Or  upon  turning  the  page,  they  are
stricken with a morbid fear that there was some kernel of wisdom that they didn’t take in on the
previous page; and they go back and re-read it, then turn the page again—only to be stricken
once again by the same fear. And so on.
    Two questions arise: What is this about and how is it to be treated? The answer to the
second question is clear: They must not back down; they must not not read. They must simply re-
train their brains in such a way that their OCD finds different prey. The written is much too
valuable  to  be  alienated  from—and  it  is  especially  value  to  people  with  OCD,  given  their
intellectual bent and given also the nature of the disturbances underlying OCD. Which brings us
to the answer to the first question, which is:
      These  reading  disturbances  are  text-book  cases  of  resistance:  The  very  reason  the
obsessive-compulsive has problems reading is that, when he is reading, he is in danger of reading
something that will shed light on his own emotional disturbances.
    Be it noted that the very obsessive-compulsives who have the most severe reading-related
problems only have them with certain kinds of material. More specifically, they only have them
with ‘good’ books and articles—with material that is rich in content. They generally don’t have
them with ‘pulp’---with things that are easy to read and not informative. And they have them the
most  with  works  that  specifically  concern  psychological  maladies.  Oftentimes,  a  given
obsessive-compulsive who practically goes into convulsions when forced to read psychology can
read mathematical logic without any problems. In fact, the sanitary of nature of such material
may make reading it a kind of haven for him from his OCD.
    In this connection, I suspect that oftentimes, when people go into psychologically (but
not  logically)  sterile  fields,  such  as  logic  and  physics,  it  is,  in  part  (though  not  entirely,
obviously),  because  of  the  absence  of  troubling  emotional  resonances  in  work  in  those
disciplines.
      And this may explain why the very obsessive-compulsives who have the most severe
reading-related difficulties may do the best on reading-comprehension tests: for the material on
such tests tends to be sterile; it tends to be narrowly factual and thus not to arouse psychological
resistances.
    But it is very important to resolve these difficulties early in the obsessive-compulsive’s
life. For if he becomes habituated to not being able to read—which often happens---then he will
lose  out  on  both  the  professional  and  personal  benefits  of  being  able  to  absorb  information
through the written. And for him, those benefits are especially great. The obsessive-compulsive
is a thinker by nature, and he is also a loner, which means that he has a double need for the
‘companionship’ of the written word.          The Limitations of CBT in the Treatment of OCD


      There is a method of treating OCD known as ‘cognitive-behavioral therapy’ (CBT). CBT
involves getting obsessive-compulsives to do the things that they are phobic about doing. So if a
given obsessive-compulsive is afraid of touching dirty surfaces with his bare hands, then his
CBT may involve him shaking hands with homeless people and not washing hands afterwards.
      Cognitive-behavioral therapy really just be called ‘Behavioral therapy’, since there is
nothing  cognitive  about  it.  In  fact,  it  is  anti-cognitive:  all  cognitive  issues  are  ignored  or
addressed only by way of their behavioral derivatives.
    In  any  case,  it  is  patently  obvious  that  getting  over  OCD  involves  changing  one’s
behavior. If a given obsessive-compulsive showers 20 times a day, then the first thing he must do
is to stop showering twenty times a day. If he spends 10 hours a cleaning, then the first thing he
must do is stop spending so much time cleaning.
    So there is nothing wrong with behavioral therapy—or ‘cognitive’ behavioral therapy, if
you want to call it that. In fact, behavioral therapy is, very obviously, an ineliminable part of the
restoration of the obsessive-compulsive’s psychological well-being.
    But here is the problem. OCD is extremely productive, as in, it produces symptoms with
almost limitless energy and creativity. If one symptom is squashed down, without its underlying
causes being addressed, some other symptom will take its place.
      This does not mean that all is lost for the obsessive-compulsive. All is most definitely not
lost. It just means that the underlying cause of the obsessive-compulsives various obsessions and
compulsions must be addressed.
      And  ultimately  there  is  always  one  such  cause.  That  cause  is  that  the  obsessive-
compulsive has fled from reality into a world of symbolic proxies of reality. His obsessions have
ideas for their objects, not the external realties for which ideas stand. And his compulsions are
merely obsessions that are externalized in behavior.
      The cause of this flight from reality into symbolic proxies thereof varies from case to
case. So the cause of the cause of OCD varies from person to person. But the cause of OCD does
not so vary. It is, in each case, a fear-driven flight from reality into a safe internal world in which
ideas have taken the place of realities and in which thinking has taken the place of doing.
      And ultimately the only way to improve the obsessive-compulsive’s condition is to get
him out of this bubble of pseudo-reality. Getting him out of this bubble involves getting him to
behave normally. There is no way to get him to rejoin the living without breaking the back of his
various compulsions. For these compulsions---for example, the endless showering and hand-
washing, the cleaning, the various repetitive and stereotyped behaviors to which OCD gives rise-
--are, as previously stated, externalized obsessions; and they thus represent the encroachment
into the external world of the obsessive-compulsive’s replacement of real realities, as it were,
with symbolic realities. The obsessive-compulsive’s various compulsives actions serve as a kind
of veil between himself and reality, that prevents him from directly engaging it. And he has to
engage it.
      Plus, he has to function-which he won’t do, as long as he is compulsive—and he also has
to enjoy leave---which he also won’t do so long as he is compulsive.
    But the essence of the restoration of the obsessive-compulsive’s sanity is getting him to
engage reality. If his behavior is treated without addressing this alienatedness from reality, theobsessions and compulsions will simply assume new form. On the other hand, if his behavior is
treated as part of a larger program of reconciling him to reality, then there will be genuine
structural  improvement,  as  opposed  to  the  mere  replacing  of  one  set  of  symptoms  of  with
another.                              Turn OCD Against Itself


    If you put a two-year old in ocean-water, it will start crying. But then it gets used to the
water. And when you try to take it out two hours later, it starts crying again!
      Children are OCD like in many respects. They need comforting routines. They need to be
told  certain  bedtime  stories  over  and  over  again.  They  need  to  sleep  with  specific  stuffed
animals. And so on.
    But this clinginess of theirs can be turned against itself. Right now, they need to sleep
with the snoopy stuffed animal, and they will howl and scream if you try to get them switch to
their Dumbo stuffed animal But then, after an initial period of protest, the clinginess they had
towards Snoopy will transfer over to Dumbo.
      With OCD it’s the same way. It’s the same way, because it’s the very same thing. OCD
isn’t just like the just-described obsessive clinginess of children: it is that clinginess. Like all
mental illnesses, OCD is regressive: it is the mind’s returning to a modus operandi from its
earlier days.
    Put  another  way,  OCD  is  the  persistence  into  adulthood  of  a  childhood  defense-
mechanism. And that childhood defense-mechanism is one of clinging to certain habits, so as to
insulate oneself from a frightening world within a safe little autistic bubble.
      And that is what OCD is. OCD is about clinging to certain rituals and habits that make
one feel safe. It is the presence, in an adult, of a defense-mechanism that, in other people, ceases
to be operative during early childhood.
      The other side of the coin is that, underlying the obsessive-compulsive’s rigidity is the
same neural plasticity—the same transferability of clinginenss—that is present in the child—that
is, indeed, the hallmark of a child’s mind.
      The obsessive-compulsive is binary: he is all about all or nothing. Either he loves or
hates. Either he does no exercise or he compulsively exercises. Either he has to have bananas in
his morning cereal or he has to not have them in his cereal.
    So  the  obsessive-compulsiveness  obsessive-compulsiveness—his  clingness—is  about
binariness; it is about all or nothing-ism. And inherent in his all or nothing-ism is a child-like
ability  to  change---to  do  180  degree  shifts.  So,  paradoxically,  underlying  the  obsessive-
compulsive’s rigidity is non-rigidity—is neural plasticity.
      And the obsessive-compulsive’s greatest asset, therefore, is his OCD itself! He must use
the binariness, and concomitant ability to change, to combat the rigidity and fixity of habits to
which his OCD disposes him.
      Let me be more concrete. There is always something that the obsessive-compulsive has to
do that he is afraid of doing---in the same way that the child is afraid of getting into the bathtub.
And the obsessive-compulsive must confront this fear, and do it quickly and unblinkingly. And
then what will happen is that he will be as obsessive-compulsive about doing this new thing—the
thing he had to do but was afraid to do—as he was about not doing it before. Just as the child,
once he settles into his bath, will kick and scream when he has to get out of the bath tub.
    So turn OCD against itself, by using the all-or-nothingism inherent in, and the neural
plasticity inherent in and hidden in that all-or-nothingins, to effectuate growth-critical changes in
oneself.                          How do I get over my OCD?


      Somebody on Quora.com asked: How do I get over my OCD?
      Here is my response:
      The right question is not ‘how do I get over OCD?’ so much as it is ‘in what sort of
context is my OCD an asset, as opposed to a liability?’ People with OCD are capable of intense
thought and prolonged concentration. They are able to be mindful of details without losing sight
of the big picture. Their ‘cognitive wiring’ is capable of being an enormous asset. At the same
time, in some contexts, that same cognitive wiring—that same intellectual acuity and emotional
sensitivity—-may be liability. In contexts, in which the obsessive-compulsive is being subjected
to extreme and untoward emotional pressures, his finely tuned psyche and hyper-responsiveness
may result in his defensively withdrawing behind a veil of obsessions and compulsions, the
ultimate purpose of which is to insulate him from a threatening and toxic external reality. There
are thus two components to dealing with OCD: (i) Identifying contexts in which one’s OCD is a
strength, as opposed to a weakness and (ii) taking advantage of such contexts to build up one’s
self-confidence so that, in adverse contexts, one does not become fearful and withdraw into a
protective (but dangerously self-limiting) cloud of obsessions and compulsions.                                  Intrusive Thoughts                    Why People with OCD Have Them


    If you have a goal, it is easy not to be lazy. But if you don’t have goal. It is hard not to be
lazy, since there is no point in not being lazy. Similarly, if you have a goal, it is easy not to
succumb to neurotic compulsions. But if you don’t have a goal, it is hard not to do so since there
is no point in tolerating the anxiety brought on by not doing so.
    As for obsessions, these are always displacements: one obsesses about such and such as a
way of not confronting thus and such. And when one has a goal, one’s obsessional energies are
naturally channeled in the right direction, since, under that circumstance, one’s mind stands to
gain more in the way of relief from anxiety by not obsessing than by obsessing. And when
doesn’t have a goal, one’s mind stands to gain more in the way of anxiety-relief by obsessing
than by not obsessing, and one is therefore inclined to keep on obsessing.
    As for intrusive thoughts, these are one’s mind’s way of telling one—in a compressed,
crude, and distorted way---what one has to do. Notice that one’s intrusive thoughts concern sex
or violence or sexual violence. This is because the people who have such thoughts are in the
process  of  castrating  themselves—they  are  in  the  process  of  trying  to  become  faceless
bureaucrats---and their minds are recoiling at this violence that is being done to them, and they
are shouting at one’s conscience mind, trying to tell it not to surrender. Intrusive thoughts are not
the problem; the person who is making a eunuch of himself is the problem; the intrusive thoughts
are the last gasp of the still robust part of one’s mind. In any case, the way to get over obtrusive
thoughts is to have a goal in life. So long as one is drifting, one’s mind will be unsatisfied and
will hiss and buck, sometimes by flooding one’s consciousness with intrusive thoughts or with
compulsions, sometimes in other ways: but so long as one is drifting, it is just a matter of time
before one’s psyche begins to disintegrate. And one can be free from psychopathology only so
long as a one has a goal that one’s mental energies can organize themselves around and that
one’s drives can discharge themselves through.

    All people are dominated by compulsions. In the case of the non-obsessive-compulsive,
those compulsions are unconscious. In the case of the obsessive-compulsive, they are conscious.
And that is what it is to have OCD: it is to consciously experience the compulsions that others
only experience unconsciously. Thus, where the non-obsessive-compulsive has the illusion of
freedom, the obsessive-compulsive has the illusion of its absence. In actuality, the obsessive-
compulsive, by virtue of being aware of the compulsions to which he is subjected, has the ability
to liberate himself from those compulsions, whereas the non-obsessive-compulsive, by virtue of
not being thus aware, does not.

                                        Physical vs. Mental Illness

      Almost all physical illnesses are simply deficits—as in, they don’t do those who have
them any good. And most mental illnesses are simply deficits.  But OCD—though functionally a
deficit—is  an  asset  in  two  important  ways.  First,  those  who  have  it  are  highly  intelligent,
meaning  that  they  are  good  at  processing  intellectual  or  cognitive  information,  and  highly
sensitive,  meaning  that  they  are  good  at  processing  affective  or  emotional  information.
Philosophical  aside:  What  we  refer  to  as  ‘sensitivity’  is  a  form  of  internal  awareness—of
inwardly  directed  intelligence:  it  is  about  different  parts  of  the  mind  being  in  goodcommunication with each other. And what we refer to as “intelligence” is outwardly directed
intelligence;  it  is  about  being  aware  of  dependence-relations  holding  among  mind-external
entities.  In  any  case,  the  obsessive-compulsive  has  both  kinds  of  intelligence;  indeed,  his
condition is about those two forms of intelligence being hyper-operative---being over-deployed.
So, yes, so long as they are over-deployed, he is seriously impaired; but his impairment has to do
with the mutually cancelling effects of powerful cognitive forces, not, as is the case with most
psychological impairments, with an absence of such forces.
      And  this  relates  to  the  second  respect  in  which  obsessive-compulsives  are  at  an
advantage. Obsessive-compulsives are psycho-dynamic. They are internally conflicted. Which,
though not an asset in and of itself, shows that they have ideals and, moreover, that they are
taking themselves to task for falling short of those ideals. Where there is no conception of right
and wrong—no conception of how, morally and otherwise, things should be—there is no internal
conflict. And where there is a conception of right and wrong, there is ipso facto a willingness to
try to make things right. And where such willingness exists, it can always be used by the person
who has it to make himself better. In the case of the obsessive-compulsive, this willingness is not
being optimally deployed; but it is there, which is what matters, since, so long as it exists, it can
always be redeployed.
    So the obsessive-compulsive, though in a very unpleasant and in some ways objectively
bad situation, is best thought as being in a situation not of sheer minuses, but of inverted pluses--
-of assets that are being turned against themselves, not of mere deficits. And this means that in
the right hands, the obsessive-compulsive stands not only to make a good recovery but to have a
positively good life.          How to Treat Compulsions that are not Accompanied
