 

HUMAN KNOWLEDGE
                                  HUMAN KNOWLEDGE
                                  ITS SCOPE AND LIMITS                                    HUMAN


                            KNOWLEDGE

                              Its Scope and Limits





                          BERTRAND RUSSELL



                                with a new Introduction by
                                      John G. Slaterg Routledge

Taylo & Francis Group
R L
                                  First published in 1948

                            Paperback edition first published in 1992
                                      by Routledge
                    2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN

                                  © 1948 Bertrand Russell
                            New introduction © 1992 John G. Slater

                                  Reprinted 1997, 2000, 2003

                              Transferred to Digital Printing 2005

                      Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form or by
any electronic, mechanical or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying
and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
                                        publishers.

                        British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
                                      Russell, Bertrand
                          Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits. -
                                          Newed
                                          I. Title
                                            121

                                    ISBN 0^15-08302-8                                Introduction










IN his private correspondence Russell was fond of referring to some of his

philosophical  projects  as  aiming  at  the  writing  of  a  “big”  book. Human

Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits is Russell’s last big book, and its topic – the

problem  of  non-demonstrative  inference  –  has  been  of  central  concern  to

philosophers  ever  since  Hume  undermined  inductive  arguments.  At  the

beginning of his career Russell focused his interest, his talent, and his energies

on  trying  to  determine  whether  there  was  any  certain  knowledge.  Since

nobody  claimed  that  either  inductive  arguments  or  any  other  non-

demonstrative arguments for that matter, yielded certain knowledge, he paid

little  or  no  attention  to  these  arguments.  Beginning  with  its  use  in

mathematics,  he  studied  demonstrative  inference  as  the  likeliest  source  of

knowledge with any claim to certainty. But the mathematics he had been

taught, he soon discovered, was built on fallacious proofs, so he was forced

back to logic for his starting point.

  A logic freed of hidden assumptions would be a useful tool by which to

establish mathematical proof on a firm basis. To his great delight he found

that many others shared his belief about the importance of a new logic for

mathematics; he avidly studied their works and he was soon ready to make

original  contributions  to  the  development  of  symbolic  logic.  As  his  work

proceeded he gradually became convinced that the new logic was not just a

tool to be used in improving mathematical proofs, but was itself the very

foundation  of  mathematics.  His  conviction,  and  that  of  Alfred  North

Whitehead, who had been one of his teachers at Cambridge, that much ofmathematics is a branch of symbolic logic, led them to devote a decade of

their  lives  to  developing  a  proof  of  their  thesis. Principia  Mathematica,

published in three large volumes between 1910 and 1913, reports the results of

their research in elaborate detail.

  When Principia Mathematica was finished Russell turned his attention to

exploiting what he had learned during its production. He was convinced that

a similar method could be applied to other realms of human knowledge with

the result that their a priori (certain) and empirical (merely probable) parts

could be disentangled. Physics was his first candidate for analysis using the

new method. Through a careful study of the writings of physicists, he hoped

to discover the minimum vocabulary required in physics, and to state, using

only  that  minimum  vocabulary  and  purely  logical  terms,  the  basic

relationships of these terms to each other. The model he had in mind is nicely

exhibited by the Peano postulates for arithmetic. Using only “zero”, “number”

and “successor” as undefined mathematical terms, and logical terms, Peano

stated  five  axioms  from  which,  using  only  logical  rules  of  inference,  the

ordinary truths of arithmetic are deducible. An important feature of Principia

Mathematica is the set of definitions that Whitehead and Russell provided for

Peano’s  undefined  terms.  These  definitions  are  written  in  purely  logical

notation, allowing each of them, and, therefore, each of Peano’s postulates, to

find its proper place in the logical and mathematical system being developed

in that book.

  Russell expended much thought on this problem of providing a foundation

for physics; he called it “the problem of matter”. But he did not succeed in

cracking it. In the course of his work, he found that progress on the problem

of  matter  required  the  solution  to  certain  problems  in  the  theory  of

knowledge, more specifically, the problem of our knowledge of the external

world. So he turned his attention in that direction and began to write a “big”

book on the theory of knowledge. Wittgenstein turned up during this period

and  Russell  showed  him  some  of  his  manuscript.  The  severity  of

Wittgenstein’s  criticism  led  Russell  to  abandon  the  book. Theory  of

Knowledge: The 1913 Manuscript was only published in 1984 as Volume 7 of

The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell. Although he abandoned one book hesoon wrote another dealing with some of the same topics. Our Knowledge of

the External World was written to be read to a Boston audience during his

visit to Harvard in the spring of 1914. Russell had just begun to bring the ideas

in that book to bear on the problem of matter, most notably in “The Relation

of Sense-Data to Physics” (1914), when the First World War shattered his

world.

  When he returned to philosophical work after the war his thinking was

still  dominated  by  the  axiomatic  model  of Principia  Mathematica.  While

studying William James with the intention of refuting him, Russell persuaded

himself that James’s theory of neutral monism – that both mind and matter

are constituted of entities of only one sort, for James it was “experience”, for

Russell,  “events”  –  was  correct.  Mind  and  matter  were  merely  different

configurations of the same basic stuff. With somewhat less persistence than he

had shown in mathematics, Russell attempted during the 1920s to discover

minimum  vocabularies  for  discussing  mind  and  matter  and  to  propose

analyses  of  some,  at  least,  of  these  terms  in  the  language  of  events.  Two

books, The Analysis of Mind (1921) and The Analysis of Matter (1927), serve to

record his achievements in these projects.

  Throughout these studies Russell tended to push questions of empirical

knowledge aside. The real gold was a priori knowledge; on such a rock one

could build one’s philosophy. Empirical knowledge had its uses, but, since it

could never be certain, it was outranked by the a priori kind. The axiomatic

method, therefore, tended to dominate his thinking. Whenever he tackled a

problem, he tried, first of all, to discover its minimum vocabulary, and then,

when  he  experienced  some  success  on  that  front,  he  would  attempt  to

formulate the basic propositions linking the various terms of the minimum

vocabulary with one another. Success in such an enterprise provides one with

a starting point, a set of axioms, from which other truths can be deduced.

One’s knowledge of the subject being investigated derives from the small set

of propositions which serve as premisses in every demonstration. This set of

propositions is, in effect, a hostage for the truth of the derived propositions. If

a derived proposition is found to be in error, one knows where to look for the

source of the error. For most of his life, Russell, like Plato and many laterphilosophers,  fell  under  the  seductive  charms  of  this  model  of  human

knowledge.

  During  the  Second  World  War,  which  he  spent  in  the  United  States,

Russell came to the conclusion that he could no longer put off dealing with

the problem of empirical knowledge. One reason for this change had been

simmering in his mind for a long time. During the period he was working on

deductive logic he was convinced that the propositions of logic were not only

true but also significant. Mathematics was true of the world. His faith in this

position had been undermined by Wittgenstein who argued very strenuously

that  the  propositions  of  logic  and  mathematics  were  tautologies,  merely

formal truths, and, therefore, told us nothing about the world. For a man of

Russell’s philosophical disposition this was a bitter pill to swallow, and it is

doubtful that he ever did swallow it. One immediate consequence of regarding

formal truths as tautologies is to increase the importance of contingent truths,

for they do refer to the world, and hence are significant.

  A  second  reason  has  to  do  with  scepticism.  Although  Russell  always

prized a sceptical frame of mind, he was not a sceptic in the philosophical

sense.  Pyrrhonian  or  Humean  scepticism  was  an  insincere  philosophy,  he

believed, because its partisans always preferred bread to stones at meal time.

Application of the scientific method has resulted in knowledge about which

only  theoretical  doubt  is  possible,  but  Hume’s  doubts  about  induction

appeared at first glance to taint these results. Since everybody uses induction

and  other  forms  of  non-demonstrative  inference,  and  everyone  has  beliefs

about the future, what is needed is a canon of non-demonstrative inference;

such a canon would serve as a justification for our faith in non-demonstrative

inference. In 1943, in an outline which he entitled “Project of Future Work”,

Russell  raised  what  he  regarded  as  the  “main  question”:  “In  what

circumstances  does  scientific  method  allow  us  to  infer  the  existence  of

something unobserved from what is observed?” Such an inference is never

legitimate in deductive, or demonstrative, logic, but it is in science and in

everyday life. A careful analytical study of the actual use of scientific method

ought  to  lead  to  the  formulation  of  a  set  of  principles  which  would,

collectively,  serve  as  a  canon  to  justify  our  use  of  non-demonstrativeinference.

    Closely related to the second reason is a third: it concerns empiricism as a

philosophy. After about 1912 Russell regarded himself as carrying on the work

of the great British empiricists, Locke, Berkeley, Hume and Mill, but most of

his philosophical work, as we have seen, had to do with the problem of a

priori knowledge. The rise of the logical positivists in the 1930s forced him to

reconsider his position. They claimed him, along with Hume and Mach and

Wittgenstein, as their philosophical ancestor, but, after reading a number of

their  works  and  finding  some  of  their  positions  too  extreme  for  his  taste,

Russell realized that he had work to do to distinguish his position from logical

positivism. The unifying thread he hit upon was an examination of all of those

arguments  whose  conclusions  are  never  certain,  given  the  truth  of  the

premisses, but only probable.

  At the end of a long study of the use of non-demonstrative arguments in

both  science  and  ordinary  life,  Russell  concluded  that  five  postulates  are

required to validate arguments of this sort. They are brought together at the

end  of  the  book  and  the  justification  for  including  each  of  them  is

summarized. What surprised Russell, and will astonish some readers, is that

the principle of induction is not a member of this set of postulates. Russell

came to the conclusion, after an extensive study of the role of probability

theory  in  scientific  method,  that  the  form  of  induction  used  there  is

demonstrable in probability theory. Therefore, it is unnecessary to assume it

as a postulate.

    Although the argument of this book proceeds in much the same way as

the arguments to be found in his earlier philosophical works, there is one

statement in the Preface which seems to call into question the philosophical

method  which  he  advocated  in  “Scientific  Method  in  Philosophy”  (1914),

written in the flush of the success of Principia Mathematica. In that essay,

after arguing that “philosophy is the science of the possible”, he went on to

amplify:  “Philosophy,  if  what  has  been  said  is  correct,  becomes

indistinguishable from logic as that word has now come to be used.” And

there  can  be  no  doubt  that  by  “logic”  he  meant  the  logic  developed  in

Principia  Mathematica.  It  is,  therefore,  astonishing  to  find,  in  the  firstparagraph of his Preface to Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits, this long-

standing position unceremoniously abandoned: “Logic, it must be admitted, is

technical in the same way as mathematics is, but logic, I maintain, is not part

of philosophy. Philosophy proper deals with matters of interest to the general

educated public, and loses much of its value if only a few professionals can

understand what is said.” His style of writing often leads him into making

statements with more sweep than he probably intends, and in this case he

probably intends less than meets the eye. Whatever the truth is on this point,

the reader of this book will soon discover that Russell has not abandoned

logical analysis as his preferred method, for one finds it used on every page,

although,  in  consideration  of  those  readers  unacquainted  with  modern

symbolic logic, he does keep the use of special symbols to a bare minimum. A

member of “the general educated public” should, therefore, be able to follow

his argument and learn a great deal about the many problems upon which

Russell turns his formidable philosophical talent in this important book.

                                                                          John G. Slater

                                                                  University of Toronto                                      Preface










THE  following  pages  are  addressed,  not  only  or  primarily  to  professional

philosophers,  but  to  that  much  larger  public  which  is  interested  in

philosophical questions without being willing or able to devote more than a

limited  amount  of  time  to  considering  them.  Descartes,  Leibniz,  Locke,

Berkeley,  and  Hume  wrote  for  a  public  of  this  sort,  and  I  think  it  is

unfortunate that during the last hundred and sixty years or so philosophy has

come to be regarded as almost as technical as mathematics. Logic, it must be

admitted, is technical in the same way as mathematics is, but logic, I maintain,

is not part of philosophy. Philosophy proper deals with matters of interest to

the  general  educated  public,  and  loses  much  of  its  value  if  only  a  few

professionals can understand what is said.

  In this book I have sought to deal, as comprehensively as I am able, with a

very large question: how comes it that human beings, whose contacts with the

world are brief and personal and limited, are nevertheless able to know as

much as they do know? Is the belief in our knowledge partly illusory? And, if

not, what must we know otherwise than through the senses? Since I have

dealt in earlier books with some parts of this problem, I am compelled to

repeat,  in  a  larger  context,  discussions  of  certain  matters  which  I  have

considered elsewhere, but I have reduced such repetition to the minimum

compatible with my purpose.

  One of the difficulties of the subject with which I am concerned is that we

must employ words which are common in ordinary speech, such as “belief”,

“truth”, “knowledge”, and “perception”. Since these words, in their every-dayuses, are vague and unprecise, and since no precise words are ready to hand

by which to replace them, it is inevitable that everything said in the earlier

stages of our inquiry should be unsatisfactory from the point of view that we

hope to arrive at in the end. Our increase of knowledge, assuming that we are

successful, is like that of a traveller approaching a mountain through a haze:

at  first  only  certain  large  features  are  discernible,  and  even  they  have

indistinct boundaries, but gradually more detail becomes visible and edges

become sharper. So, in our discussions, it is impossible first to clear up one

problem and then proceed to another, for the intervening haze envelops all

alike. At every stage, though one part of our problem may be in the focus of

attention, all parts are more or less relevant. The different key words that we

must use are all interconnected, and so long as some remain vague, others

must, more or less, share this defect. It follows that what is said at first is

liable to require emendation later. The Prophet announced that if two texts of

the  Koran  appeared  inconsistent,  the  later  text  was  to  be  taken  as

authoritative, and I should wish the reader to apply a similar principle in

interpreting what is said in this book.

  The book has been read in typescript by my friend and pupil Mr. C. K.

Hill, and I am indebted to him for many valuable criticisms, suggestions, and

emendations. Large parts of the typescript have also been read by Mr. Hiram

J. McLendon, who has made a number of useful suggestions.

  Part III, Chapter IV, on “Physics and Experience”, is a reprint, with few

alterations, of a little book with the above title, published by the Cambridge

University Press, to whom I owe thanks for permission to reprint it.                                    Contents











INTRODUCTION


PART I. THE WORLD OF SCIENCE


I.Individual and Social Knowledge


II.The Universe of Astronomy


III.The World of Physics


IV.Biological Evolution


V.The Physiology of Sensation and Volition


VI.The Science of Mind


PART II. LANGUAGE


I.The Uses of Language


II.Ostensive Definition


III.Proper NamesIV.Egocentric Particulars


V.Suspended Reactions: Knowledge and Belief


VI.Sentences


VII.External Reference of Ideas and Beliefs


VIII.Truth: Elementary Forms


IX.Logical Words and Falsehood


X.General Knowledge


XI.Fact, Belief, Truth, and Knowledge


PART III. SCIENCE AND PERCEPTION


Introduction


I.Knowledge of Facts and Knowledge of Laws


II.Solipsism


III.Probable Inference in Common-Sense Practice


IV.Physics and Experience


V.Time in Experience


VI.Space in Psychology


VII.Mind and Matter


PART IV. SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTSI.Interpretation


II.Minimum Vocabularies


III.Structure


IV.Structure and Minimum Vocabularies


V.Time, Public and Private


VI.Space in Classical Physics


VII.Space-Time


VIII.The Principle of Individuation


IX.Causal Laws


X.Space-Time and Causality


PART V. PROBABILITY


Introduction


I.Kinds of Probability


II.Mathematical Probability


III.The Finite-Frequency Theory


IV.The Mises-Reichenbach Theory


V.Keynes’s Theory of ProbabilityVI.Degrees of Credibility


VII.Probability and Induction


PART VI. POSTULATES OF SCIENTIFIC INFERENCE


I.Kinds of Knowledge


II.The Role of Induction


III.The Postulate of Natural Kinds, or of Limited Variety


IV.Knowledge Transcending Experience


V.Causal Lines


VI.Structure and Causal Laws


VII.Interaction


VIII.Analogy


IX.Summary of Postulates


X.The Limits of Empiricism


Index                                Introduction










THE central purpose of this book is to examine the relation between individual

experience  and  the  general  body  of  scientific  knowledge.  It  is  taken  for

granted  that  scientific  knowledge,  in  its  broad  outlines,  is  to  be  accepted.

Scepticism,  while  logically  impeccable,  is  psychologically  impossible,  and

there is an element of frivolous insincerity in any philosophy which pretends

to accept it. Moreover, if scepticism is to be theoretically defensible it must

reject all inferences from what is experienced; a partial scepticism, such as the

denial of physical events experienced by no one, or a solipsism which allows

events in my future or in my unremembered past, has no logical justification,

since it must admit principles of inference which lead to beliefs that it rejects.

  Ever  since  Kant,  or  perhaps  it  would  be  more  just  to  say  ever  since

Berkeley,  there  has  been  what  I  regard  as  a  mistaken  tendency  among

philosophers to allow the description of the world to be influenced unduly by

considerations derived from the nature of human knowledge. To scientific

common sense (which I accept) it is plain that only an infinitesimal part of the

universe is known, that there were countless ages during which there was no

knowledge, and that there probably will be countless ages without knowledge

in the future. Cosmically and causally, knowledge is an unimportant feature

of the universe; a science which omitted to mention its occurrence might,

from an impersonal point of view, suffer only from a very trivial imperfection.

In describing the world, subjectivity is a vice. Kant spoke of himself as having

effected a “Copernican revolution”, but he would have been more accurate if

he had spoken of a “Ptolemaic counter-revolution”, since he put Man back atthe centre from which Copernicus had dethroned him.

  But when we ask, not “what sort of world do we live in?” but “how do we

come by our knowledge about the world?” subjectivity is in order. What each

man knows is, in an important sense, dependent upon his own individual

experience: he knows what he has seen and heard, what he has read and what

he has been told, and also what, from these data, he has been able to infer. It is

individual, not collective, experience that is here in question, for an inference

is required to pass from my data to the acceptance of testimony. If I believe

that there is such a place as Semipalatinsk, I believe it because of things that

have happened to me; and unless certain substantial principles of inference are

accepted, I shall have to admit that all these things might have happened to

me without there being any such place.

  The  desire  to  escape  from  subjectivity  in  the  description  of  the  world

(which I share) has led some modern philosophers astray—at least so it seems

to me—in relation to theory of knowledge. Finding its problems distasteful,

they have tried to deny that these problems exist. That data are private and

individual is a thesis which has been familiar since the time of Protagoras.

This  thesis  has  been  denied  because  it  has  been  thought,  as  Protagoras

thought, that, if admitted, it must lead to the conclusion that all knowledge is

private  and  individual.  For  my  part,  while  I  admit  the  thesis,  I  deny  the

conclusion; how and why, the following pages are intended to show.

  In virtue of certain events in my own life, I have a number of beliefs about

events that I do not experience—the thoughts and feelings of other people, the

physical objects that surround me, the historical and geological past of the

earth, and the remote regions of the universe that are studied in astronomy.

For my part, I accept these beliefs as valid, apart from errors of detail. By this

acceptance  I  commit  myself  to  the  view  that  there  are  valid  processes  of

inference  from  events  to  other  events—more  particularly,  from  events  of

which  I  am  aware  without  inference  to  events  of  which  I  have  no  such

awareness. To discover what these processes are is a matter of analysis of

scientific  and  common-sense  procedure,  in  so  far  as  such  procedure  is

generally accepted as scientifically valid.

  Inference from a group of events to other events can only be justified ifthe world has certain characteristics which are not logically necessary. So far

as deductive logic can show, any collection of events might be the whole

universe; if, then, I am ever to be able to infer events, I must accept principles

of inference which lie outside deductive logic. All inference from events to

events demands some kind of interconnection between different occurrences.

Such interconnection is traditionally asserted in the principle of causality or

natural law. It is implied, as we shall find, in whatever limited validity may be

assigned to induction  by  simple  enumeration.  But  the  traditional  ways  of

formulating the kind of interconnection that must be postulated are in many

ways defective, some being too stringent and some not sufficiently so. To

discover the minimum principles required to justify scientific inferences is one

of the main purposes of this book.

  It is a commonplace to say that the substantial inferences of science, as

opposed to those of logic and mathematics, are only probable—that is to say,

when the premisses are true and the inference correct, the conclusion is only

likely  to  be  true.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  examine  what  is  meant  by

“probability”. It will be found that there are two different concepts that may

be meant. On the one hand, there is mathematical probability: if a class has n

members,  and m  of  them  have  a  certain  characteristic,  the  mathematical

probability  that  an  unspecified  member  of  this  class  will  have  the

characteristic in question is m/n. On the other hand, there is a wider and

vaguer concept, which I call “degree of credibility”, which is the amount of

credence that it is rational to assign to a more or less uncertain proposition.

Both kinds of probability are involved in stating the principles of scientific

inference.

  The course of our inquiry, in broad outline, will be as follows.

  Part I, on the world of science, describes some of the main features of the

universe which scientific investigation has made probable. This Part may be

taken as setting the goal which inference must be able to reach, if our data

and our principles of inference are to justify scientific practice.

  Part  II,  on  language,  is  still  concerned  with  preliminaries.  These  are

mainly  of  two  sorts.  On  the  one  hand,  it  is  important  to  make  clear  the

meanings of certain fundamental terms, such as “fact” and “truth”. On theother hand, it is necessary to examine the relation of sensible experience to

empirical concepts such as “red”, “hard”, “metre”, or “second”. In addition, we

shall  examine  the  relation  of  words  having  an  essential  reference  to  the

speaker,  such  as  “here”  and  “now”,  to  impersonal  words,  such  as  those

assigning latitude, longitude, and date. This raises problems, of considerable

importance  and  some  difficulty,  which  are  concerned  with  the  relation  of

individual experience to the socially recognized body of general knowledge.

  In Part III, on Science and Perception, we begin our main inquiry. We are

concerned, here, to disentangle data from inferences in what ordinarily passes

for empirical knowledge. We are not yet concerned to justify inferences, or to

investigate  the  principles  according  to  which  they  are  made,  but  we  are

concerned to show that inferences (as opposed to logical constructions) are

necessary to science. We are concerned also to distinguish between two kinds

of space and time, one subjective and appertaining to data, the other objective

and  inferred.  Incidentally  we  shall  contend  that  solipsism,  except  in  an

extreme form in which it has never been entertained, is an illogical halfway

house  between  the  fragmentary  world  of  data  and  the  complete  world  of

science.

  Part IV, on scientific concepts, is concerned to analyse the fundamental

concepts  of  the  inferred  scientific  world,  more  especially  physical  space,

historical time, and causal laws. The terms employed in mathematical physics

are required to fulfil two kinds of conditions: on the one hand, they must

satisfy certain formulae; on the other hand, they must be so interpreted as to

yield results that can be confirmed or confuted by observation. Through the

latter condition they are linked to data, though somewhat loosely; through the

former they become determinate as regards certain structural properties. But

considerable  latitude  of  interpretation  remains.  It  is  prudent  to  use  this

latitude in such a way as to minimize the part played by inference as opposed

to construction; on this ground, for example, point-instants in space-time are

constructed as groups of events or of qualities. Throughout this Part the two

concepts  of  space-time  structure  and  causal  chains  assume  a  gradually

increasing importance. As Part III was concerned to discover what can be

counted as data, so Part IV is concerned to set forth, in a general way, what, ifscience is to be justified, we must be able to infer from our data.

  Since  it  is  admitted  that  scientific  inferences,  as  a  rule,  only  confer

probability  on  their  conclusions, Part  V  proceeds  to  the  examination  of

Probability.  This  term  is  capable  of  various  interpretations,  and  has  been

differently defined by different authors. These interpretations and definitions

are examined, and so are the attempts to connect induction with probability.

In  this  matter  the  conclusion  reached  is,  in  the  main,  that  advocated  by

Keynes: that inductions do not make their conclusions probable unless certain

conditions are fulfilled, and that experience alone can never prove that these

conditions are fulfilled.

  Part VI, on the postulates of scientific inference, endeavours to discover

what are the minimum assumptions, anterior to experience, that are required

to justify us in inferring laws from a collection of data; and further, to inquire

in what sense, if any, we can be said to know that these assumptions are valid.

The  main  logical  function  that  the  assumptions  have  to  fulfil  is  that  of

conferring a high probability on the conclusions of inductions that satisfy

certain conditions. For this purpose, since only probability is in question, we

do  not  need  to  assume  that  such-and-such  a  connection  of  events  occurs

always,  but  only  that  it  occurs  frequently.  For  example,  one  of  the

assumptions that appear necessary is that of separable causal chains, such as

are exhibited by light-rays or sound-waves. This assumption can be stated as

follows:  when  an  event  having  a  complex  space-time  structure  occurs,  it

frequently happens that it is one of a train of events having the same or a very

similar structure. (A more exact statement will be found in Chapter VI of this

Part.) This is part of a wider assumption of regularity, or natural law, which,

however, requires to be stated in more specific forms than is usual, for in its

usual form it turns out to be a tautology.

  That  scientific  inference  requires,  for  its  validity,  principles  which

experience  cannot  render  even  probable,  is,  I  believe,  an  inescapable

conclusion from the logic of probability. For empiricism, it is an awkward

conclusion. But I think it can be rendered somewhat more palatable by the

analysis of the concept of “knowledge” undertaken in Part II. “Knowledge”, in

my opinion, is a much less precise concept than is generally thought, and hasits roots more deeply embedded in unverbalized animal behaviour than most

philosophers have been willing to admit. The logically basic assumptions to

which our analysis leads us are psychologically the end of a long series of

refinements which start from habits of expectation in animals, such as that

what has a certain kind of smell will be good to eat. To ask, therefore, whether

we “know” the postulates of scientific inference, is not so definite a question

as it seems. The answer must be: in one sense, yes, in another sense, no; but in

the sense in which “no” is the right answer we know nothing whatever, and

“knowledge” in this sense is a delusive vision. The perplexities of philosophers

are due, in a large measure, to their unwillingness to awaken from this blissful

dream.                                        part I


                      The World of Science                                          I 


          Individual and Social Knowledge


SCIENTIFIC knowledge aims at being wholly impersonal, and tries to state what

has been discovered by the collective intellect of mankind. In this chapter I

shall consider how far it succeeds in this aim, and what elements of individual

knowledge have to be sacrificed in order to achieve the measure of success

that is possible.

  The community knows both more and less than the individual: it knows,

in its collective capacity, all the contents of the Encyclopaedia and all the

contributions to the Proceedings of learned bodies, but it does not know the

warm  and  intimate  things  that  make  up  the  colour  and  texture  of  an

individual life. When a man says “I can never convey the horror I felt on

seeing Buchenwald” or “no words can express my joy at seeing the sea again

after years in a prison camp”, he is saying something which is strictly and

precisely true: he possesses, through his experience, knowledge not possessed

by those whose experience has been different, and not completely capable of

verbal expression. If he is a superb literary artist he may create in sensitive

readers a state of mind not wholly unlike his own, but if he tries scientific

methods the stream of his experience will be lost and dissipated in a dusty

desert.

    Language,  our  sole  means  of  communicating scientific  knowledge,  is

essentially social in its origin and in its main functions. It is true that, if a

mathematician  were  wrecked  on  a  desert  island  with  a  note-book  and  a

pencil, he would, in all likelihood, seek to make his solitude endurable by

calculations using the language of mathematics; it is true also that a man may

keep a diary which he intends to conceal from all eyes but his own. On a more

everyday plane, most of us use words in solitary thinking. Nevertheless the

chief purpose of language is communication, and to serve this purpose it must

be public, not a private dialect invented by the speaker. It follows that what is

most personal in each individual’s experience tends to evaporate during theprocess  of  translation  into  language.  What  is  more,  the  very  publicity  of

language is in large part a delusion. A given form of words will usually be

interpreted by competent hearers in such a way as to be true for all of them or

false for all of them, but in spite of this it will not have the same meaning for

all  of  them.  Differences  which  do  not  affect  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  a

statement are usually of little practical importance, and are therefore ignored,

with the result that we all believe our private world to be much more like the

public world than it really is.

  This is easily proved by considering the process of learning to understand

language. There are two ways of getting to know what a word means: one is

by a definition in terms of other words, which is called verbal definition; the

other is by frequently hearing the word when the object which it denotes is

present,  which  is  called ostensive  definition.  It  is  obvious  that  ostensive

definition  is  alone  possible  in  the  beginning,  since  verbal  definition

presupposes a knowledge of the words used in the definiens. You can learn by

a verbal definition that a pentagon is a plane figure with five sides, but a child

does not learn in this way the meaning of every-day words such as “rain”,

“sun”, “dinner”, or “bed”. These are taught by using the appropriate word

emphatically while the child is noticing the object concerned. Consequently

the meaning that the child comes to attach to the word is a product of his

personal  experience,  and  varies  according  to  his  circumstances  and  his

sensorium. A child who frequently experiences a mild drizzle will attach a

different idea to the word “rain” from that formed by a child who has only

experienced tropical torrents. A short-sighted and a long-sighted child will

connect different images with the word “bed”.

  It is true that education tries to depersonalize language, and with a certain

measure of success. “Rain” is no longer the familiar phenomenon, but “drops

of water falling from clouds towards the earth”, and “water” is no longer what

makes  you  wet,  but  H2O.  As  for  hydrogen  and  oxygen,  they  have  verbal

definitions which have to be learnt by heart; whether you understand them

does not matter. And so, as your instruction proceeds, the world of words

becomes more and more separated from the world of the senses; you acquire

the art of using words correctly, as you might acquire the art of playing thefiddle; in the end you become such a virtuoso in the manipulation of phrases

that you need hardly ever remember that words have meanings. You have

then become completely a public character, and even your inmost thoughts

are suitable for the encyclopaedia. But you can no longer hope to be a poet,

and if you try to be a lover you will find your depersonalized language not

very  successful  in  generating  the  desired  emotions.  You  have  sacrificed

expression to communication, and what you can communicate turns out to be

abstract and dry.

  It  is  an  important  fact  that  the  nearer  we  come  to  the  complete

abstractness of logic, the less is the unavoidable difference between different

people in the meaning attached to a word. I see no reason why there should be

any  difference  at  all  between  two  suitably  educated  persons  in  the  idea

conveyed to them by the word “3481”. The words “or” and “not” are capable

of  having  exactly  the  same  meaning  for  two  different  logicians.  Pure

mathematics, throughout, works with concepts which are capable of being

completely public and impersonal. The reason is that they derive nothing from

the  senses,  and  that  the  senses  are  the  source  of  privacy.  The  body  is  a

sensitive  recording  instrument,  constantly  transmitting  messages  from  the

outside world; the messages reaching one body are never quite the same as

those reaching another, though practical and social exigencies have taught us

ways of disregarding the differences between the percepts of neighbouring

persons.  In  constructing  physics  we  have  emphasized  the  spatio-temporal

aspect of our perceptions, which is the aspect that is most abstract and most

nearly akin to logic and mathematics. This we have done in the pursuit of

publicity, in order to communicate what is communicable and to cover up the

rest in a dark mantle of oblivion.

  Space and time, however, as human beings know them, are not in reality

so impersonal as science pretends. Theologians conceive God as viewing both

space and time from without, impartially, and with a uniform awareness of

the  whole;  science  tries  to  imitate  this  impartiality  with  some  apparent

success,  but  the  success  is  in  part  illusory.  Human  beings  differ  from  the

theologians’ God in the fact that their space and time have a here and now.

What is here and now is vivid, what is remote has a gradually increasingdimness.  All  our  knowledge  of  events  radiates  from  a  space-time  centre,

which is the little region that we are occupying at the moment. “Here” is a

vague term: in astronomical cosmology the Milky Way may count as “here”,

in the study of the Milky Way “here” is the solar system, in the study of the

solar system “here” is the earth, in geography it is the town or district in

which we live, in physiological studies of sensation it is the brain as opposed

to the rest of the body. Larger “heres” always contain smaller ones as parts; all

“heres” contain the brain of the speaker, or part of it. Similar considerations

apply to “now”.

    Science professes to eliminate “here” and “now”. When some event occurs

on the earth’s surface, we give its position in the space-time manifold by

assigning latitude, longitude, and date. We have developed a technique which

insures that all accurate observers with accurate instruments will arrive at the

same estimate of latitude, longitude, and date. Consequently there is no longer

anything  personal  in  these  estimates,  in  so  far  as  we  are  content  with

numerical statements of which the meaning is not too closely investigated.

Having arbitrarily decided that the longitude of Greenwich and the latitude of

the equator are to be zero, other latitudes and longitudes follow. But what is

“Greenwich”?  This  is  hardly  the  sort  of  term  that  ought  to  occur  in  an

impartial survey of the universe, and its definition is not mathematical. The

best  way  to  define  “Greenwich”  is  to  take  a  man  to  it  and  say:  “Here  is

Greenwich.”  If  some  one  else  has  already  determined  the  latitude  and

longitude  of  the  place  where  you  are,  “Greenwich”  can  be  defined  by  its

latitude  and  longitude  relative  to  that  place;  it  is,  for  example,  so  many

degrees east and so many degrees north of New York. But this does not get rid

of “here”, which is now New York instead of Greenwich.

    Moreover  it  is  absurd  to define  either  Greenwich  or  New  York  by  its

latitude  and  longitude.  Greenwich  is  an  actual  place,  inhabited  by  actual

people,  and  containing  buildings  which  antedate  its  longitudinal  pre-

eminence. You can, of course, describe Greenwich, but there always might be

another town with the same characteristics. If you want to be sure that your

description applies to no other place, the only way is to mention its relation to

some other place, for instance, by saying that it is so many miles down theThames  from  London  Bridge.  But  then  you  will  have  to  define  “London

Bridge”. Sooner or later you are faced with the necessity of defining some

place as “here”, and this is an egocentric definition, since the place in question

is  not  “here”  for  everybody.  There  may  be  a  way  of  escape  from  this

conclusion;  at  a  later  stage,  we  will  resume  the  question.  But  there  is  no

obvious or easy way of escape, and until one is found all determinations of

latitude and longitude are infected with the subjectivity of “here”. This means

that, although different people assign the same latitude and longitude to a

place, they do not, in ultimate analysis, attach the same meaning to the figures

at which they arrive.

  The common world in which we believe ourselves to live is a construction,

partly  scientific,  partly  pre-scientific.  We  perceive  tables  as  circular  or

rectangular, in spite of the fact that a painter, to reproduce their appearance,

has to paint ellipses or, non-rectangular quadrilaterals. We see a person as of

about  the  same  size  whether  he  is  two  feet  from  us  or  twelve.  Until  our

attention is drawn to the facts, we are quite unconscious of the corrections

that experience has led us to make in interpreting sensible appearances. There

is  a  long  journey  from  the  child  who  draws  two  eyes  in  a  profile  to  the

physicist  who  talks  of  electrons  and  protons,  but  throughout  this  journey

there is one constant purpose: to eliminate the subjectivity of sensation, and

substitute a kind of knowledge which can be the same for all percipients.

Gradually the difference between what is sensed and what is believed to be

objective grows greater; the child’s profile with two eyes is still very like what

is seen, but the electrons and protons have only a remote resemblance of

logical structure. The electrons and protons, however, have the merit that they

may be what actually exists where there are no sense-organs, whereas our

immediate visual data, owing to their subjectivity, are almost certainly not

what takes place in the physical objects that we are said to see.

  The electrons and protons—assuming it scientifically correct to believe in

them—do  not  depend  for  their  existence  upon  being  perceived;  on  the

contrary, there is every reason to believe that they existed for countless ages

before there were any percipients in the universe. But although perception is

not needed for their existence, it is needed to give us a reason for believing intheir existence. Hundreds of thousands of years ago, a vast and remote region

emitted incredible numbers of photons, which wandered through the universe

in all directions. At last a very few of them hit a photographic plate, in which

they  caused  chemical  changes  which  made  parts  of  the  plate  look  black

instead of white when examined by an astronomer. This tiny effect upon a

minute but highly educated organism is our only reason for believing in the

existence of a nebula comparable in size, with the Milky Way. The order for

knowledge is the inverse of the causal order. In the order for knowledge, what

comes first is the brief subjective experience of the astronomer looking at a

pattern of black and white, and what comes last is the nebula, vast, remote,

and belonging to the distant past.

  In considering the reasons for believing in any empirical statement, we

cannot escape from perception with all its personal limitations. How far the

information which we obtain from this tainted source can be purified in the

filter  of  scientific  method,  and  emerge  resplendently  godlike  in  its

impartiality, is a difficult question, with which we shall be much concerned.

But there is one thing that is obvious from the start: only in so far as the

initial perceptual datum is trustworthy can there be any reason for accepting

the vast cosmic edifice of inference which is based upon it.

  I am not suggesting that the initial perceptual datum must be accepted as

indubitable; that is by no means the case. There are well-known methods of

strengthening  or  weakening  the  force  of  individual  testimony;  certain

methods  are  used  in  the  law  courts,  somewhat  different  ones  are  used  in

science. But all depend upon the principle that some weight is to be attached

to every piece of testimony, for it is only in virtue of this principle that a

number  of  concordant  testimonies  are  held  to  give  a  high  probability.

Individual percepts are the basis of all our knowledge, and no method exists

by which we can begin with data which are public to many observers.                                          II 


                The Universe of Astronomy


ASTRONOMY is the oldest of the sciences, and the contemplation of the heavens,

with their periodic regularities, gave men their first conceptions of natural

law. But in spite of its age, astronomy is as vigorous as at any former time,

and as important in helping us to form a just estimate of man’s position in the

universe.

  When the Greeks began inventing astronomical hypotheses, the apparent

motions of the sun and moon and planets among the fixed stars had already

been observed for thousands of years by the Babylonians and Egyptians, who

had also learned to predict lunar eclipses with certainty and solar eclipses

with  a  considerable  risk  of  error.  The  Greeks,  like  other  ancient  nations,

believed the heavenly bodies to be gods, or at any rate each closely controlled

by  its  own  god  or  goddess.  Some,  it  is  true,  questioned  this  opinion:

Anaxagoras, in the time of Pericles, maintained that the sun was a red-hot

stone and that the moon was made of earth. But for this opinion he was

prosecuted and compelled to fly from Athens. It is very questionable whether

either Plato or Aristotle was equally rationalistic. But it was not the most

rationalistic among the Greeks who were the best astronomers; it was the

Pythagoreans,  to  whom  superstition  suggested  what  happened  to  be  good

hypotheses.

  The Pythagoreans, towards the end of the fifth century B.C., discovered

that the earth is spherical; about a hundred years later, Eratosthenes estimated

the earth’s diameter correctly within about fifty miles. Heraclides of Pontus,

during the fourth century, maintained that the earth rotates once a day and

that Venus and Mercury describe orbits about the sun. Aristarchus of Samos,

in the third century, advocated the complete Copernican system, and worked

out a theoretically correct method of estimating the distances of the sun and

moon. As regards the sun this result, it is true, was wildly wrong, owing to

inaccuracy in his data; but a hundred years later Posidonius made an estimatewhich  was  about  half  of  the  correct  figure.  This  extraordinarily  vigorous

advance,  however,  did  not  continue,  and  much  of  it  was  forgotten in  the

general decay of intellectual energy during later antiquity.

  The cosmos, as it appears, for instance, in Plotinus, was a cosy and human

little abode in comparison with what it has since become. The supreme deity

regulated the whole, but each star was a subordinate deity, similar to a human

being  but  in  every  way  nobler  and  wiser.  Plotinus  finds  fault  with  the

Gnostics for believing that, in the created universe, there is nothing more

worthy of admiration than the human soul. The beauty of the heavens, to

him, is not only visual, but also moral and intellectual. The sun and moon and

planets  are  exalted  spirits,  actuated  by  such  motives  as  appeal  to  the

philosopher in his best moments. He rejects with indignation the morose view

of  the  Gnostics  (and  later  of  the  Manicheans)  that  the  visible  world  was

created by a wicked Demiurge and must be despised by every aspirant to true

virtue. On the contrary, the bright beings that adorn the sky are wise and

good, and such as to console the philosopher amid the welter of folly and

disaster that was overtaking the Roman Empire.

  The  medieval  Christian  cosmos,  though  less  austere  than  that  of  the

Manicheans, was shorn of some elements of poetic fancy that paganism had

preserved to the end. The change, however, was not very great, for angels and

archangels more or less took the place of the polytheists’ celestial divinities.

Both the scientific and the poetic elements of the medieval cosmos are set

forth in Dante’s Paradiso; the scientific elements are derived from Aristotle

and Ptolemy. The earth is spherical, and at the centre of the universe; Satan is

at the centre of the earth, and hell is an inverted cone of which he forms the

apex.  At  the  antipodes  of  Jerusalem  is  the  Mount  of  Purgatory,  at  whose

summit is the earthly paradise, which is just in contact with the sphere of the

moon.

  The heavens consist of ten concentric spheres, that of the moon being the

lowest.  Everything  below  the  moon  is  subject  to  corruption  and  decay;

everything from the moon upwards is indestructible. Above the moon, the

spheres in their order are those of Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter,

Saturn and the fixed stars, beyond which is the Primum Mobile. Last of all,above the Primum Mobile, is the Empyrean, which has no motion, and in

which there are no times or places. God, the Aristotelian Unmoved Mover,

causes the rotation of the Primum Mobile, which, in turn, communicates its

motion to the sphere of the fixed stars, and so on downwards to the sphere of

the moon. Nothing is said in Dante as to the sizes of the various spheres, but

he is able to traverse them all in the space of twenty-four hours. Clearly the

universe as he conceived it was somewhat minute by modern standards; it

was also very recent, having been created a few thousand years ago. The

spheres, which all had the earth at the centre, afforded the eternal abodes of

the elect. The elect consisted of those baptized persons who had reached the

required standard both in faith and works, together with the patriarchs and

prophets who had foreseen the coming of Christ, and a very few pagans who,

while on earth, had been miraculously enlightened.

  It was against this picture of the universe that the pioneers of modern

astronomy had to contend. It is interesting to contrast the commotion about

Copernicus  with  the  almost  complete  oblivion  that  befell  Aristarchus.

Cleanthes  the  Stoic  had  urged  that  Aristarchus  should  be  prosecuted  for

impiety,  but  the  Government  was  apathetic;  perhaps  if  he  had  been

persecuted, like Galileo, his theories might have won wider publicity. There

were, however, other more important reasons for the difference between the

posthumous  fame  of  Aristarchus  and  that  of  Copernicus.  In  Greek  times

astronomy was an amusement of the idle rich—a very dignified amusement, it

is  true,  but  not  an  integrated  part  of  the  life  of  the  community.  By  the

sixteenth  century,  science  had  invented  gunpowder  and  the  mariner’s

compass,  the  discovery  of  America  had  shown  the  limitations  of  ancient

geognosis,  Catholic  orthodoxy  had  begun  to  seem  an  obstacle  to  material

progress, and the fury of obscurantist theologians made the men of science

appear as heroic champions of a new wisdom. The seventeenth century, with

the telescope, the science of dynamics, and the law of gravitation, completed

the triumph of the scientific outlook, not only as the key to pure knowledge,

but  as  a  powerful  means  of  economic  progress.  From  this  time  onwards,

science  was  recognized  as  a  matter  of  social  and  not  merely  individual

interest.  The theory of the sun and planets as a finished system was practically

completed by Newton. As against Aristotle and the medieval philosophers it

appeared that the sun, not the earth, is the centre of the solar system; that the

heavenly  bodies,  left  to  themselves,  would  move  in  straight  lines,  not  in

circles; that in fact they move neither in straight lines nor in circles, but in

ellipses; and that no action from outside is necessary to preserve their motion.

But as regards the origin of the system Newton had nothing scientific to say;

he supposed that at the Creation the planets had been hurled by the hand of

God in a tangential direction, and had then been left by Him to the operation

of the law of gravitation. Before Newton, Descartes had attempted a theory of

the origin of the solar system, but his theory proved untenable. Kant and

Laplace  invented  the  nebular  hypothesis,  according  to  which  the  sun  was

formed by the condensation of a primitive nebula, and threw off the planets

successively as a result of increasingly rapid rotation. This theory also proved

defective, and modern astronomers incline to the view that the planets were

caused by the passage of another star through the near neighbourhood of the

sun.  The  subject  remains  obscure,  but  no  one  doubts  that,  by  some

mechanism, the planets came out of the sun.

  The most remarkable astronomical progress in recent times has been in

relation to the stars and the nebulae. The nearest of the fixed stars, Alpha

                                                12
Centauri, is at a distance of about 25 × 10 miles, or 4 · 2 light-years. (Light

travels 186,000 miles a second; a light-year is the distance it travels in a year.)

The first determination of the distance of a star was in 1835; since then, by

various ingenious methods, greater and greater distances have been computed.

It is believed that the most distant object that can be detected with the most

powerful telescope now in existence is about 500 million light-years away.

    Something is now known of the general structure of the universe. The sun

is a star in the galaxy, which is an assembly of about 300,000 million stars,

about 150,000 light-years across and between 25,000 and 40,000 light-years

thick. The total mass of the galaxy is about 160,000 million times the mass of

                                                  27
the sun; the mass of the sun is about 2 × 10 tons. The whole of this system is

slowly rotating about its centre of gravity; the sun takes about 225 million

years to complete its orbit round the milky way.  In  the  space  beyond  the  milky  way,  other  systems  of  stars,  of

approximately the same size as the milky way, are scattered at fairly regular

intervals throughout the space that our telescopes can explore. These systems

are called extra-galactic nebulae; it is thought that about 30 millions of them

are visible, but the census is not yet complete. The average distance between

two nebulae is about 2 million light-years. (Most of these facts are taken from

Hubble, The Realm of the Nebulae, 1936.)

  One of the oddest facts about the nebulae is that the lines in their spectra,

with very few exceptions, are shifted towards the red, and that the amount of

the  shift  is  proportional  to  the  distance  of  the  nebula.  The  only  plausible

explanation is that the nebulae are moving away from us, and that the most

distant ones are receding most quickly. At a distance of 135 million light-

years, this velocity amounts to 14,300 miles per second (Hubble, Plate VIII, p.

118). At a certain distance, the velocity would become equal to the velocity of

light,  and  the  nebulae  would  therefore  be  invisible  however  powerful  our

telescopes might be.

  The general theory of relativity has an explanation to offer of this curious

phenomenon. The theory maintains that the universe is of finite size—not that

it has an edge, outside which there is something which is not part of the

universe, but that it is a three-dimensional sphere, in which the straightest

possible lines return in time to their starting-point, as on the surface of the

earth.  The  theory  goes  on  to  predict  that  the  universe  must  be  either

contracting or expanding; it then uses the observed facts about the nebulae to

decide for expansion. According to Eddington, the universe doubles in size

every 1,300 million years or so. (New Pathways in Science, p. 210.) If this is

true, the universe was once quite small, but will in time become rather large.

  This brings us to the question of the ages of the earth and the stars and the

nebulae.  On  grounds  that  are  largely  geological,  the  age  of  the  earth  is

estimated at about 3,000 million years. The age of the sun and the other stars

is still a matter of controversy. If, in the interior of a star, matter can be

annihilated by transforming an electron and a proton into radiation, the stars

may be several million million years old; if not, only a few thousand million.

(H. Spencer Jones, Worlds Without End, p. 231.) On the whole, the latter viewseems to be prevailing.

  There is even some reason to think that the universe had a beginning in

time; Eddington used to maintain that it began in about 90,000 million B.C.

This is certainly more than the 4,004 in which our great-grandfathers believed,

but it is still a finite period, and raises all the old puzzles as to what was going

on before that date.

  The net result of this summary survey of the astronomical world is that,

while it is certainly very large and very ancient, there are grounds—though as

yet they are very speculative—for thinking that it is neither infinitely large

nor infinitely old. The general theory of relativity professes to be able to tell

us things about the universe as a whole, by means of an ingenious mixture of

observation and reasoning. If this is valid—and I am by no means persuaded

that it is—the increase of scale, both in space and time, which has hitherto

characterized  astronomy,  has  a  limit,  and  one  which  we  are  within

measurable distance of reaching. Eddington maintains that the circumference

of the universe is of the order of 6,000 million light-years. (New Pathways in

Science, p. 218.) If so, somewhat better telescopes should enable us to “grasp

this sorry scheme of things entire”. As we are beginning to see, we may before

long be also able to “shatter it to bits”. But I do not think we shall be able to

“remould it nearer to the heart’s desire”.                                          III 


                      The World of Physics


THE most advanced science in the present day, and the one which seems to

throw the most light on the structure of the world, is physics. This science

virtually begins with Galileo, but in order to appreciate his work it will be

well to glance briefly at what was thought before his time.

  The scholastics, whose views were in the main derived from Aristotle,

thought that there were different laws for celestial and terrestrial bodies, and

also for living and dead matter. They held that dead matter, left to itself,

would gradually lose any motion it might have, at any rate in the terrestrial

sphere. Everything living, according to Aristotle, had some kind of soul. The

vegetable soul, possessed by all plants and animals, was only concerned with

growth; the animal soul was concerned to cause movements. There were four

elements, earth, water, air, and fire, of which earth and water were heavy,

while  air  and  fire  were  light.  Earth  and  water  had  a  natural  downward

motion, air and fire a natural upward motion. There was also, in the highest

heavens, a fifth element, a kind of sublimated fire. There was no suggestion of

one set of laws for all kinds of matter, and there was no science of changes in

the movements of bodies.

    Galileo—and  in  a  lesser  degree  Descartes—introduced  the  fundamental

concepts and principles which sufficed for physics until the present century. It

appeared that the laws of motion are the same for all kinds of dead matter,

and probably for living matter also. Descartes held that animals are automata,

and that their movements could theoretically be calculated by using the same

principlesthat  govern  a  falling  lump  of  lead.  The  view  that  all  matter  is

homogeneous, and that its only scientifically important property is position in

space,  prevailed  practically  among  physicists,  at  any  rate  as  a  working

hypothesis.  For  theological  reasons,  human  bodies  were  often  (though  not

always) exempted from the rigid determinism to which physical laws seemed

to lead. With this possible exception, scientific orthodoxy came to endorseLaplace’s view, that a calculator possessed of sufficient mathematical ability,

given the position and velocity and mass of every particle in the universe at a

given instant, could calculate the whole past and future of the physical world.

If, as some thought, miracles occasionally intervened, these lay outside the

purview of science, since they were in their very nature not subject to law. For

this reason, even those who believed in miracles had no occasion to lapse

from scientific rigour in their calculations.

  Galileo introduced the two principles that did most to make mathematical

physics possible: the law of inertia, and the parallelogram law. Something

must be said about each of these.

  The law of inertia, familiar as Newton’s first law of motion, states, in

Newton’s language, that:

  “Every body perseveres in its state of rest, or of uniform motion in a right

line, unless it is compelled to change that state by forces impressed thereon.”

  The conception of “force”, which was prominent in the work of Galileo

and Newton, turned out to be superfluous, and was eliminated from classical

dynamics during the nineteenth century. This necessitated a re-statement of

the law of inertia. But let us first consider the law in relation to the beliefs

prevailing before Galileo.

  All terrestrial motions tend to slacken and finally stop. Bowls on even the

smoothest bowling-green come to rest after a while; a stone thrown onto ice

does not go on sliding for ever. The heavenly bodies, it is true, persist in their

orbits, without any discoverable loss of velocity; but their motions are not

rectilinear. According to the law of inertia, the retardation of the stone on ice,

and the curvilinear orbits of the planets, are not to be explained by anything

intrinsic in their own natures, but by the action of the environment.

  This principle led to the possibility of regarding the physical world as a

causally  self-contained  system.  It  soon  appeared  that  in  any  dynamically

independent  system—such  as  the  sun  and  planets  are  to  a  very  near

approximation—the amount of motion, or momentum, in every direction is

constant. Thus a universe once in motion will remain in motion for ever,

unless stopped by a miracle. Aristotle had thought that the planets needed

gods to push them round their orbits, and that movements on earth could bespontaneously initiated by animals. The motions of matter, on this view, could

only be accounted for by taking account of non-material causes. The law of

inertia changed this, and made it possible to calculate the motions of matter

by means of the laws of dynamics alone.

    Technically, the principle of inertia meant that the causal laws of physics

should be stated in terms of acceleration, i.e. a change of velocity in amount

or direction or both. Uniform motion in a circle, which the ancients and the

scholastics regarded as “natural” for the heavenly bodies, ceased to be so,

since it required a continual change in the direction of motion. The departure

from a straight line required a cause, which was found in Newton’s law of

gravitation.

    Acceleration being the second differential of position with respect to time,

it followed from the law of inertia that the causal laws of dynamics must be

differential equations of the second order, though this form of statement could

not be made until Newton and Leibniz had invented the infinitesimal calculus.

Throughout all the modern changes in theoretical physics, this consequence of

the law of inertia has stood firm. The fundamental importance of acceleration

is  perhaps  the  most  permanent  and  the  most  enlightening  of  all  Galileo’s

discoveries.

  The parallelogram law, in Newtonian language, is concerned with what

happens when a body is subject to two forces at once. It says that if a body is

subject to two forces, one of which is measured, in direction and magnitude,

by a line AB, and the other by a line BC, then the effect of their both acting at

once is measured by the line AC. This amounts, roughly speaking, to saying

that when two forces act simultaneously the effect is the same as if they acted

successively.  In  technical  language  it  means  that  the  equations  are  linear,

which greatly facilitates mathematical calculation.

  The  law  may  be  interpreted  as  asserting  the  mutual  independence  of

different  causes  acting  simultaneously.  Take,  for  example,  the  question  of

projectiles, in which Galileo was professionally interested. If the earth did not

attract a projectile, it would, according to the law of inertia, continue to move

horizontally with uniform velocity (neglecting the resistance of the air). If the

projectile  had  no  initial  velocity,  it  would  fall  vertically  with  uniformacceleration. To determine where it will in fact be after (say) a second, we

may  suppose  that  it  first  moves  horizontally  with  uniform  velocity  for  a

second, and then, starting from rest, falls vertically with uniform acceleration

for a second.

  When the forces to which a body is subject are not constant, the principle

does not allow us to take each separately for a finite time, but if the finite time

is short the result of taking each separately will be approximately right, and

the shorter the time the more nearly right it will be, approaching complete

rightness as a limit.

  It  must  be  understood  that  this  law  is  purely  empirical;  there  is  no

mathematical reason for its truth. It is to be believed in so far as there is

evidence for it, and no further. In quantum mechanics it is not assumed, and

there  are  phenomena  which  seem  to  show  that  it  is  not  true  in  atomic

occurrences. But in the physics of large-scale occurrences it remains true, and

in classical physics it played a very important role.

  From Newton to the end of the nineteenth century, the progress of physics

involved  no  basically  new  principles.  The  first  revolutionary  novelty  was

Planck’s introduction of the quantum constant h in the year 1900. But before

considering quantum theory, which is chiefly important in connection with

the  structure  and  behaviour  of  atoms,  a  few  words  must  be  said  about

relativity,  which  involved  a  departure  from  Newtonian  principles  much

slighter than that of quantum theory.

  Newton believed that, in addition to matter, there is absolute space and

absolute time. That is to say, there is a three-dimensional manifold of points

and a one-dimensional manifold of instants, and there is a three-term relation

involving matter, space, and time, namely the relation of “occupying” a point

at an instant. In this view Newton agreed with Democritus and the other

atomists  of  antiquity,  who  believed  in  “atoms  and  the  void”.  Other

philosophers had maintained that empty space is nothing, and that there must

be matter everywhere. This was Descartes’ opinion, and also that of Leibniz,

with whom Newton (using Dr. Clarke as his mouthpiece) had a controversy

on the subject.

    Whatever physicists might hold as a matter of philosophy, Newton’s viewwas implicit in the technique of dynamics, and there were, as he pointed out,

empirical reasons for preferring it. If water in a bucket is rotated, it climbs up

the sides, but if the bucket is rotated while the water is kept still, the surface

of the water remains flat. We can therefore distinguish between rotation of

the water and rotation of the bucket, which we ought not to be able to do if

rotation were merely relative. Since Newton’s time other arguments of the

same sort have accumulated. Foucault’s pendulum, the flattening of the earth

at the poles, and the fact that bodies weigh less in low latitudes than in high

ones, would enable us to infer that the earth rotates even if the sky were

always covered with clouds; in fact, on Newtonian principles we can say that

the  rotation  of  the  earth,  not  the  revolution  of  the  heavens,  causes  the

succession of night and day and the rising and setting of the stars. But if space

is purely relative, the difference between the statements “the earth rotates”

and “the heavens revolve” is purely verbal: both must be ways of describing

the same phenomena.

  Einstein showed how to avoid Newton’s conclusions, and make spatio-

temporal position purely relative. But his theory of relativity did much more

than  this.  In  the  special  theory  of  relativity  he  showed  that  between  two

events  there  is  a  relation,  which  may  be  called  “interval”,  which  can  be

divided  in  many  different  ways  into  what  we  should  regard  as  a  spatial

distance and what we should regard as a lapse of time. All these different

ways are equally legitimate; there is not one way which is more “right” than

the others. The choice between them is a matter of pure convention, like the

choice between the metric system and the system of feet and inches.

  It  follows  from  this  that  the  fundamental  manifold  of  physics  cannot

consist  of  persistent  particles  in  motion,  but  must  consist  of  a  four-

dimensional manifold of “events”. There will be three co-ordinates to fix the

position of the event in space, and one to fix its position in time, but a change

of  co-ordinates  may  alter  the  time-co-ordinate  as  well  as  the  space  co-

ordinates, and not only, as before, by a constant amount, the same for all

events—as, for example, when dating is altered from the Mohammedan era to

the Christian.

  The general theory of relativity—published in 1915, ten years after thespecial theory—was primarily a geometrical theory of gravitation. This part of

the  theory  may  be  considered  firmly  established.  But  it  has  also  more

speculative features. It contains, in its equations, what is called the “cosmical

constant”, which determines the size of the universe at any time. This part of

the theory, as I mentioned before, is held to show that the universe is growing

either continually larger or continually smaller. The shift towards the red in

the spectra of distant nebulae is held to show that they are moving away from

us with a velocity proportional to their distance from us. This leads to the

conclusion  that  the  universe  is  expanding,  not  contracting.  It  must  be

understood  that,  according  to  this  theory,  the  universe  is  finite  but

unbounded, like the surface of a sphere, but in three dimensions. All this

involves  non-Euclidean  geometry,  and  is  apt  to  seem  mysterious  to  those

whose imagination is obstinately Euclidean.

  Two kinds of departure from Euclidean space are involved in the general

theory of relativity. On the one hand, there are what may be called the small-

scale departures (where the solar system, e.g., is regarded as “small”), and on

the other hand the large-scale departure of the universe as a whole. The small-

scale  departures  occur  in  the  neighbourhood  of  matter,  and  account  for

gravitation. They may be compared to hills and valleys on the surface of the

earth. The large-scale departure may be compared with the fact that the earth

is round and not flat. If you start from any point on the earth’s surface and

travel as straight as you can, you will ultimately return to your starting-point.

So, it is held, the straightest line possible in the universe will ultimately return

into itself. The analogy with the surface of the earth fails in that the earth’s

surface is two-dimensional and has regions outside it, whereas the spherical

space of the universe is three-dimensional and has nothing outside it. The

present  circumference  of  the  universe  is  between  6,000  and  60,000  million

light-years, but the size of the universe is doubled about every 1,300 million

years. All this, however, must still be regarded as open to doubt.

                                              1
  According to Professor E. A. Milne, there is a great deal more that is

questionable in Einstein’s theory. Professor Milne holds that there is no need

to regard space as non-Euclidean, and that the geometry we adopt can be

decided entirely by motives of convenience. The difference between differentgeometries,  according  to  him,  is  a  difference  in  language,  not  in  what  is

described.  Where  physicists  disagree  it  is  rash  for  an  outsider  to  have  an

opinion, but I incline to think that Professor Milne is very likely to be in the

right.

  Quantum  theory,  in  contrast  to  the  theory  of  relativity,  is  mainly

concerned  with  the  smallest  things  about  which  knowledge  is  possible,

namely atoms and their structure. During the nineteenth century the atomic

constitution  of  matter  became  well  established,  and  it  was  found  that  the

different  elements  could  be  placed  in  a  series  starting  with  hydrogen  and

ending  with  uranium.  The  place  of  an  element  in  this  series  is  called  its

“atomic number”. Hydrogen has the atomic number 1, and uranium 92. There

are two gaps in the series at present, so that the number of known elements is

90, not 92; but the gaps may be filled any day, as a number of previously

existing  gaps  have  been.  In  general,  but  not  always,  the  atomic  number

increases with the atomic weight. Before Rutherford, there was no plausible

theory as to the structure of atoms, or as to the physical properties which

caused them to fall into a series. The series was determined by their chemical

properties alone, and of these properties no physical explanation existed.

  The Rutherford–Bohr atom, as it is called after its two inventors, had a

beautiful  simplicity,  now,  alas,  lost.  But  although  it  has  become  only  a

pictorial  approximation  to  the  truth,  it  can  still  be  used  when  extreme

accuracy is not required, and without it the modern quantum theory could

never have arisen. It is therefore still necessary to say something about it.

    Rutherford gave experimental reasons for regarding an atom as composed

of a nucleus carrying positive electricity surrounded by very much lighter

bodies, called “electrons”, which carried negative electricity, and revolved, like

planets, in orbits about the nucleus. When the atom is not electrified, the

number of planetary electrons is the atomic number of the element concerned;

at all times, the atomic number measures the net positive electricity carried by

the  nucleus.  The  hydrogen  atom  consists  of  a  nucleus  and  one  planetary

electron; the nucleus of the hydrogen atom is called a “proton”. It was found

that the nuclei of other elements could be regarded as composed of protons

and electrons, the number of protons being greater than that of the electronsby the atomic number of the element. Thus helium, which is number 2, has a

nucleus consisting of four protons and two electrons. The atomic weight is

practically determined by the number of protons, since a proton has about

1,850 times the mass of an electron, so that the contribution of the electrons to

the total mass is almost negligible.

  It has been found that, in addition to electrons and protons, there are two

other constituents of atoms, which are called “positrons” and “neutrons”. A

positron  is  just  like  an  electron, except  that  it  carries  positive  instead  of

negative electricity; it has the same mass as an electron, and probably the

same size, in so far as either can be said to have a size. The neutron has no

electricity, but has approximately the same mass as a proton. It seems not

unlikely that a proton consists of a positron and a neutron. If so, there are

three ultimate kinds of constituents in the perfected Rutherford–Bohr atom:

the neutron, which has mass but no electricity, the positron, carrying positive

electricity, and the electron, carrying an equal amount of negative electricity.

  But  we  must  now  return  to  theories  which  ante-date  the  discovery  of

neutrons and positrons.

  Bohr added to the Rutherford picture a theory as to the possible orbits of

electrons, which, for the first time, explained the lines in the spectrum of an

element. This mathematical explanation was almost, but not quite, perfect in

the cases of hydrogen and positively electrified helium; in other cases the

mathematics was too difficult, but no reason appeared to suppose that the

theory would give wrong results if the mathematics could be worked out. His

theory made use of Planck’s quantum constant h, concerning which a few

words must be said.

  Planck,  by  studying  radiation,  proved  that  in  a  light  or  heat  wave  of

frequency v the energy must be h.v or 2h.v or 3h.v or some other integral

multiple of h.v, where h is “Planck’s constant”, of which the value in C.G.S.

                            −27
units is about 6 · 55 × 10, and the dimensions are those of action, i.e. energy

× time. Before Planck, it had been supposed that the energy of a wave could

vary continuously, but he showed conclusively that this could not be the case.

The frequency of waves is the number that pass a given point in a second. In

the case of light, the frequency determines the colour; violet light has thehighest frequency, red light the lowest. There are other waves of just the same

kind  as  light-waves,  but  not  having  the  frequencies  that  cause  visual

sensations of colour. Higher frequencies than those of violet light are, in order,

ultra-violet, X-rays and γ-rays; lower frequencies, infra-red and those used in

wireless telegraphy.

  When an atom emits light, it does so because it has parted with an amount

of energy equal to that in the light-wave. If it emits light of frequency v, it

must, according to Planck’s theory, have parted with an amount of energy

measured by h. v or some integral multiple of h. v. Bohr supposed that this

happened through a planetary electron jumping from a larger to a smaller

orbit; consequently the change of orbit must be such as to involve a loss of

energy h. v or some integral multiple of this amount. It followed that only

certain  orbits  could  be  possible.  In  the  hydrogen  atom,  there  would  be  a

smallest possible orbit, and the other possible ones would have 4, 9, 16, …

times the radius of the minimum orbit. This theory, first propounded in 1913,

was  found  to  agree  well  with  observation,  and  for  a  time  won  general

acceptance. Gradually, however, it was found that there were facts which it

could not explain, so that, though clearly a step on the way to the truth, it

could no longer be accepted as it stood. The new and more radical quantum

theory, which dates from 1925, is due in the main to two men, Heisenberg and

Schrödinger.

  In  the  modern  theory  there  is  no  longer  any  attempt  to  make  an

imaginative picture of the atom. An atom only gives evidence of its existence

when it emits energy, and therefore experimental evidence can only be of

changes of energy. The new theory takes over from Bohr the doctrine that the

energy in an atom must have one of a discrete series of values involving h;

each of these is called an “energy level”. But as to what gives the atom its

energy the theory is prudently silent.

  One of the oddest things about the theory is that it has abolished the

distinction between waves and particles. Newton thought that light consisted

of  particles  emitted  by  the  source  of  the  light;  Huygens  thought  that  it

consisted of waves. The view of Huygens prevailed, and until recently was

thought to be definitely established. But new experimental facts seemed todemand that light should consist of particles, which were called “photons”. Per

contra, De Broglie suggested that matter consists of waves. In the end it was

shown  that  everything  in  physics  can  be  explained  either  on  the  particle

hypothesis  or  on  the  wave  hypothesis.  There  is  therefore  no  physical

difference between them, and either may be adopted in any problem as may

suit our convenience. But whichever is adopted, it must be adhered to; we

must not mix the two hypotheses in one calculation.

  In quantum theory, individual atomic occurrences are not determined by

the equations; these suffice only to show that the possibilities form a discrete

series, and that there are rules determining how often each possibility will be

realized in a large number of cases. There are reasons for believing that this

absence of complete determinism is not due to any incompleteness in the

theory,  but  is  a  genuine  characteristic  of  small-scale  occurrences.  The

regularity which is found in macroscopic phenomena is a statistical regularity.

Phenomena involving large numbers of atoms remain deterministic, but what

an  individual  atom  may  do  in  given  circumstances  is  uncertain,  not  only

because  our  knowledge  is  limited,  but  because  there  are  no  physical  laws

giving a determinate result.

  There is another result of quantum theory, about which, in my opinion,

too  much  fuss  has  been  made,  namely  what  is  called  Heisenberg’s

uncertainty-principle.  According  to  this  there  is  a  theoretical  limit  to  the

accuracy  with  which  certain  connected  quantities  can  be  simultaneously

measured. In specifying the state of a physical system, there are certain pairs

of connected quantities; one such pair is position and momentum (or velocity,

so long as the mass is constant), another is energy and time. It is of course a

commonplace  that  no  physical  quantity  can  be  measured  with  complete

accuracy, but it had always been supposed that there was no theoretical limit

to the increase of accuracy obtainable by improved technique. According to

Heisenberg’s principle this is not the case. If we try to measure simultaneously

two connected quantities of the above sort, any increase of accuracy in the

measurement of one of them (beyond a certain point) involves a decrease in

the accuracy of the measurement of the other. In fact, there will be errors in

both measurements, and the product of these two errors can never be less thanh/2π. This means that, if one could be completely accurate, the error in the

other  would  have  to  be  infinite.  Suppose,  for  instance,  that  you  wish  to

determine the position and velocity of a particle at a certain time: if you get

the position very nearly right, there will be a large error in the velocity, and if

you get the velocity very nearly right, there will be a large error as to the

position. Similarly as regards energy and time: if you measure the energy very

accurately, the time when the system has this energy will have a large margin

of  uncertainty,  while  if  you  fix  the  time  very  accurately  the  energy  will

become uncertain within wide limits. This is not a question of imperfection in

our measuring apparatus, but is an essential principle of physics.

  There  are  physical  considerations  which  make  this  principle  less

surprising. It will be observed that h is a very small quantity, since it is of the

          −27
order of 10. Therefore wherever h is relevant we are concerned with matters

involving very great minuteness. When an astronomer observes the sun, the

sun preserves a lordly indifference to his proceedings. But when a physicist

tries to find out what is happening to an atom, the apparatus by means of

which he makes his observations is likely to have an effect upon the atom.

Detailed  considerations  show  that  the  sort  of  apparatus  best  suited  for

determining the position of an atom is likely to affect its velocity, while the

sort of apparatus best suited for determining its velocity is likely to alter its

position. Similar arguments apply to other pairs of related quantities. I do not

think, therefore, that the uncertainty principle has the kind of philosophical

importance that is sometimes attributed to it.

  Quantum  equations  differ  from  those  of  classical  physics  in  a  very

important respect, namely that they are not “linear”. This means that when

you  have  discovered  the  effect  of  one  cause  alone,  and  then  the  effect  of

another cause alone, you cannot find the effect of both together by adding the

two previous effects. This has very odd results. Suppose, for instance, that you

have a screen with a small slit, and you bombard it with particles; some of

these will get through the slit. Suppose now you close the first slit and make a

second; then some will get through the second slit. Now open both slits at

once. You would think that the number getting through both slits would be

the sum of the previous numbers, but this turns out not to be the case. Thebehaviour of the particles at one slit seems to be affected by the existence of

the other slit. The equations are such as to predict this result, but it remains

surprising. In quantum mechanics there is less independence of causes than in

classical physics, and this adds greatly to the difficulty of the calculations.

  Both relativity and quantum theory have had the effect of replacing the

old conception of “mass” by that of “energy”. “Mass” used to be defined as

“quantity  of  matter”;  “matter”  was,  on  the  one  hand  “substance”  in  the

metaphysical sense, and on the other hand the technical form of the common-

sense notion of “thing”. “Energy” was, in its early stages, a state of “matter”. It

consisted of two parts, kinetic and potential. The kinetic energy of a particle is

half the product of the mass and the square of the velocity. The potential

energy is measured by the work that would have to be done to bring the

particle to its present position from some standard position. (This leaves a

constant undetermined, but that is of no consequence.) If you carry a stone

from the ground to the top of a tower, it acquires potential energy in the

process;  if  you  drop  it  from  the  top,  the  potential  energy  is  gradually

transformed into kinetic energy during the fall. In any self-contained system,

the total energy is constant. There are various forms of energy, of which heat

is one; there is a tendency for more and more of the energy in the universe to

take  the  form  of  heat.  The  conservation  of  energy  first  became  a  well-

grounded  scientific  generalization  when  Joule  measured  the  mechanical

equivalent of heat.

    Relativity theory and experiment both showed that mass is not constant,

as had been held, but is increased by rapid motion; if a particle could move as

fast as light, its mass would become infinite. Since all motion is relative, the

different estimates of mass formed by different observers, according to their

motion relative to the particle in question, are all equally legitimate. So far as

this theory is concerned, however, there is still one estimate of mass which

may be considered fundamental, namely the estimate made by an observer

who is at rest relatively to the body whose mass is to be measured. Since the

increase of mass with velocity is only appreciable for velocities comparable

with that of light, this case covers practically all observations except those of

α and β particles ejected from radio-active bodies.  Quantum theory has made a greater inroad upon the concept of “mass”. It

now  appears  that  whenever  energy  is  lost  by  radiation  there  is  a

corresponding loss of mass. The sun is held to be losing mass at the rate of

four  million  tons  a  second.  To  take  another  instance:  a  helium  atom,

unelectrified, consists (in the language of Bohr’s theory) of four protons and

four electrons, while a hydrogen atom consists of one proton and one electron.

It might have been supposed that, assuming this to be the case, the mass of a

helium atom would be four times that of a hydrogen atom. This, however, is

not the case: taking the mass of the helium atom as 4, that of the hydrogen

atom is not 1, but 1 · 008. The reason is that energy is lost (by radiation) when

four hydrogen atoms combine to form one helium atom—at least so we must

suppose, for the process is not one which has ever been observed.

  It is thought that the combination of four hydrogen atoms to form one

atom of helium occurs in the interior of stars, and could be made to occur in

terrestrial laboratories if we could produce temperatures comparable to those

in the interior of stars. Almost all the loss of energy involved in building up

elements  other  than  hydrogen  occurs  in  the  transition  to  helium;  in  later

stages  the  loss  of  energy  is  small.  If  helium,  or  any  element  other  than

hydrogen, could be artificially manufactured out of hydrogen, there would be

in the process an enormous liberation of energy in the form of light and heat.

This  suggests  the  possibility  of  atomic  bombs  more  destructive  than  the

present ones, which are made by means of uranium. There would be a further

advantage: the supply of uranium in the planet is very limited, and it is feared

that it may be used up before the human race is exterminated, but if the

practically unlimited supply of hydrogen in the sea could be utilized there

would be considerable reason to hope that homo sapiens might put an end to

himself, to the great advantage of the other less ferocious animals.

  But it is time to return to less cheerful topics.

  The language of Bohr’s theory is still adequate for many purposes, but not

for  stating  the  fundamental  principles  of  quantum  physics.  To  state  these

principles, we must, avoid all pictures of what goes on in an atom, and must

abandon  attempts  to  say  what  energy  is.  We  must  say  simply:  there  is

something quantitative, to which we give the name “energy”; this somethingis very unevenly distributed in space; there are small regions in which there is

a great deal of it, which are called “atoms”, and are those in which, according

to older conceptions, there was matter; these regions are perpetually absorbing

or  emitting  energy  in  forms  that  have  a  periodic  “frequency”.  Quantum

equations give rules determining the possible forms of energy emitted by a

given atom, and the proportion of cases (out of a large number) in which each

of  the  possibilities  will  be  realized.  Everything  here  is  abstract  and

mathematical  except  the  sensations  of  colour,  heat,  etc.,  produced  by  the

radiant energy in the observing physicist.

    Mathematical physics contains such an immense superstructure of theory

that its basis in observation tends to be obscured. It is, however, an empirical

study,  and  its  empirical  character  appears  most  unequivocally  where  the

physical constants are concerned. Eddington (New Pathways in Science,  p.

230) gives the following list of the primitive constants of physics:


•  e, The charge of an electron,

•  m, The mass of an electron,

•  M, The mass of a proton,

•  h, Planck’s constant,

•  c, The velocity of light,

•  G, The constant of gravitation,

•  λ, The cosmical constant.


  These constants appear in the fundamental equations of physics, and it is

usually (though not always) held that no one of them can be inferred from the

others.  Other  constants,  it  is  held,  are  theoretically  deducible  from  these;

sometimes the calculation can be actually made, sometimes it is as yet too

difficult for the mathematicians. They represent the residuum of brute fact

after as much as possible has been reduced to equations. (I am not including

brute facts which are merely geographical.)

  It should be observed that we are much more certain of the importance of

these constants than we are of this or that interpretation of them. Planck’s

constant,  in  its  brief  history  since  1900,  has  been  represented  verbally  invarious ways, but its numerical value has not been affected by such changes.

Whatever may happen to quantum theory in the future, it is virtually certain

that the constant h will remain important. Similarly as regards e and m, the

charge and mass of an electron. Electrons may disappear completely from the

fundamental principles of physics, but e and m are pretty certain to survive. In

a sense it may be said that the discovery and measurement of these constants

is what is most solid in modern physics.1 Relativity Gravitation and World Structure. By E. A. Milne. Oxford, 1935.                                          IV 


                        Biological Evolution


WE  have  been  considering  hitherto  either  the  universe  as  a  whole,  or

characteristics in which all parts of the universe are alike. What is said in

astronomy and physics, if true, is completely neutral, in the sense that it has

no special relation to ourselves or to our spatio-temporal neighbourhood. But

we must now turn our attention to more parochial matters. There are things

that we can know about our own planet and its parasites which we cannot

know about other regions. It may be that life exists elsewhere, or that, in some

remote nebula, there is something which, while not life as we know it, is

equally complex and equally different from the inorganic substances known

to us. But although this may be the case, there is no positive reason to suppose

that it is; all that we know about life we know from observations on or very

near the surface of the earth. In the scientific study of life we are turning our

backs on the magnificent vistas of astronomy, and abandoning the search for

the minute and intimate knowledge of structure that is to be derived from

atomic theory.

    Mankind have found it more difficult to be scientific about life than about

the heavenly bodies; in the time of Newton, such biology as existed was still

deeply infected with superstition. The power of growth possessed by all living

things,  and  the  power  of  apparently  spontaneous  movement  possessed  by

animals, seemed mysterious. The movements of animals had not the simple

regularity of the movements of the heavenly bodies. Moreover we ourselves

are  alive,  and  everything  that  distinguishes  us,  whether  from  stocks  and

stones or from birds and brutes, must, it was thought, be noble, and too grand

for the cold detachment of scientific investigation.

  The Bible, while it was at first an obstacle to acceptance of the Copernican

system, was soon found to allow of interpretations which made it possible for

men of exemplary piety, like Newton himself, to accept the verbal inspiration

of the Scriptures and also the teachings of astronomy. But in regard to biologyit  was  more  difficult  to  reconcile  science  and  Genesis.  If  the  Bible  was

accepted literally, the world was created in the year 4004 B.C. or thereabouts;

each species of animal was separately created, and Adam and Eve had no

parents. Man, alone among animals, was held to have an immortal soul, free

will, moral responsibility, and the awful capacity for Sin. The gulf between

him and the lower animals was, in consequence, unbridgeable; a creature half

human  and  half  simian  was  inconceivable.  To  the  doctrines  derived  from

Scripture were added others derived from Plato or Aristotle. Man alone was

rational, that is to say, he could do sums and understand syllogisms. Every

species was immutable, and was a copy of a divine pattern existing in heaven;

this is the doctrine implied in Shakespeare’s line:


  But in them nature’s copy’s not eterne.

  When  geology  revealed  extinct  species,  they  were  supposed  to  have

perished in the flood. All now existing animals of any given species were

descended from a pair in the ark, though some naturalists wondered how the

sloths could have got from Mount Ararat to South America in the time, and

why none of them had lingered en route. There was, however, an inconsistent

theory that some animals were spontaneously generated by the action of the

sun on slime.

  As  late  as  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century,  men  of  considerable

scientific  attainments  were  troubled  by  perplexities  which  now  seem

astonishing. It was held, for example, that before the Fall there were no beasts

of prey; lions and tigers contentedly munched grass, while vultures regaled

themselves  with  fruits  and  herbs.  When  geology  seemed  to  show  that

carnivorous animals had existed before there were human beings, it became

difficult to hold that all pain, whether of men or of animals, is a punishment

for Adam’s sin in eating the apple. Hugh Miller, a competent geologist of the

middle  of  last  century,  while  admitting  the  evidence,  found  it  deeply

disturbing. Geology, altogether, had a hard struggle. Buffon was condemned

by the Sorbonne, and compelled to recant, because he maintained that the

present mountains and valleys have been produced by “secondary causes”, i.e.

not directly by God’s creative fiat.  The shortness of the time-scale allowed by Genesis was, at first, the most

serious obstacle to scientific geology. Those who maintained that sedimentary

rocks  were  produced  by  processes like  those  that  we  see  in  action  at  the

present day were reduced to fantastic hypotheses, such as that all the chalk

was deposited during the few weeks while the Flood was subsiding. Fossils

were awkward for everybody; they suggested a greater antiquity than the

orthodox  could  allow,  but  they  afforded  evidence  for  the  Flood  which  so

annoyed Voltaire that he invented utterly absurd theories to account for them.

  At last it was agreed that the “days” in Genesis meant “ages”, and on the

basis of this compromise the geologists acquired a certain freedom to theorize.

But even then Tennyson was still troubled:


  Are God and Nature then at strife,


  That Nature lends such evil dreams?


  So careful of the type she seems,


  So careless of the single life.


  So careful of the type? But no!


  From scarped cliff and quarried stone


  She cries: A thousand types are gone,


  I care for nothing, all must go.

  All  the  earlier  battles  between  science  and  theology  in  this  field  were

overshadowed  by  the  great  battle  over  evolution,  which  began  with  the

publication of Darwin’s Origin of Species in 1859, and is not yet ended in

America. But I shall say no more about these somewhat dusty controversies.

    “Evolution” is a word which is often used with an ethical flavour, but

science is not improved by an admixture of ethics. If “evolution” is to have no

ethical implications, and yet is to be distinguished from mere change, I think

it must mean increase of complexity and heterogeneity. In this sense there is

reason to believe that there has been evolution also in the inanimate world.The nebular hypothesis, though it will not account for the development of the

solar system, accounts admirably for the development of galaxies. At some

period, there must have been vast clouds, which gradually condensed into

systems of stars. The various elements must have been gradually built up, by

processes of which we are now beginning to know something. The building

up  of  chemical  compounds  is  better  understood.  This  process  cannot  be

carried very far except at a moderate temperature, not very different from the

temperatures to which we are accustomed; at these temperatures, molecules of

a very high degree of complexity can come into existence.

  What  distinguishes  living  from  dead  matter?  Primarily,  its  chemical

constitution and cell structure. It is to be supposed that its other characteristics

follow  from  these.  The  most  notable  of  these  others  are  assimilation  and

reproduction,  which,  in  the  lowest  forms  of  life,  are  not  very  sharply

distinguished from each other. The result of assimilation and reproduction is

that, given a small amount of living matter in a suitable environment, the

total  amount  will  quickly  increase.  A  pair  of  rabbits  in  Australia  quickly

become many tons of rabbit. A few measles bacilli in a child quickly become

many  millions.  A  few  seeds  dropped  by  birds  on  Krakatoa  after  volcanic

devastation  quickly  became  luxuriant  vegetation.  So  far  as  animals  are

concerned, this property of living matter is not fully exhibited, since animals

require  food  that  is  already  organic;  but  plants  can  transform  inorganic

substances into living matter. This is a purely chemical process, but it is one

from  which,  presumably,  most  of  the  other  peculiarities  of  living  matter,

considered as a whole, in some sense follow.

  It is an essential feature of living matter that it is not chemically static, but

is  undergoing  continual  chemical  change;  it  is,  one  may  say,  a  natural

chemical laboratory. Our blood undergoes one kind of change as it circulates

round the body, and an opposite change when it comes in contact with air in

the lungs. Food, from the moment of contact with the saliva, undergoes a

series of elaborate processes, which end by giving it the chemical structure

appropriate to some part of the body.

  There  is  no  reason,  except  the  great  complexity  of  the  molecules  that

compose  a  living  body,  why  such  molecules  should  not  be  manufacturedartificially; nor is there the slightest reason for supposing that, if they were

manufactured, they would lack anything distinctive of living matter naturally

generated. Aristotle thought that there was a vegetable soul in every plant or

animal, and something similar has been widely believed by vitalists. But for

this view there has come to be less and less plausibility as organic chemistry

has  progressed.  The  evidence,  though  not  conclusive,  tends  to  show  that

everything  distinctive  of  living  matter  can  be  reduced  to  chemistry,  and

therefore ultimately to physics. The fundamental laws governing living matter

are, in all likelihood, the very same that govern the behaviour of the hydrogen

atom, namely the laws of quantum mechanics.

  One  of  the  characteristics  of  living  organisms  that  have  seemed

mysterious  is  the  power  of  reproduction.  Rabbits  generate  rabbits,  robins

generate robins, and worms generate worms. Development from an embryo

does  not  occur  in  the  simplest  forms  of  life;  unicellular  organisms  merely

grow till they reach a certain size, and then split. Something of this survives in

sexual reproduction: part of the female body becomes an ovum, part of the

male  body  a  sperm,  but  this  part  is  so  much  less  than  half  that  it seems

qualitatively,  and  not  merely  quantitatively,  different  from  the  process  of

splitting into two equal halves. It is not in the splitting, however, that the

novelty consists, but in the combination of male and female elements to make

a new organism, which, in the natural process of growth, becomes, in time,

like its adult parents.

  As a consequence of the Mendelian theory, the process of heredity has

come to be more or less understood. It appears that in the ovum and in the

sperm there are a certain fairly small number of “genes”, which carry the

hereditary characteristics. The laws of heredity, like those of quantum theory,

are  discrete  and  statistical;  in  general,  when  grandparents  differ  in  some

character, we cannot tell which grandparent a given child will resemble, but

we can tell the proportion, out of a large number, that will resemble this one

or that as regards the character in question.

  In general, the genes carry the parental character, but sometimes there are

sports, or “mutants”, which differ substantially from the parent. They occur

naturally in a small proportion of cases, and they can be produced artificiallyby X-rays. It is these sports that give the best opportunity for evolution, i.e. for

the development of new kinds of animals or plants by descent from old kinds.

  The general idea of evolution is very old; it is already to be found in

Anaximander  (sixth  century B.C.),  who  held  that  men  are  descended  from

fishes.  But  Aristotle  and  the  Church  banished  such  theories  until  the

eighteenth century. Already Descartes, Kant, and Laplace had advocated a

gradual origin for the solar system, in place of sudden creation followed by a

complete  absence  of  change.  As  soon  as  geologists  had  succeeded  in

determining the relative ages of different strata, it became evident from fossils

that the more complex forms of life came into existence later than the simpler

forms; moreover many forms that existed long ago have completely died out.

It was found that the highly differentiated types to which we are accustomed

have  been  preceded  by  intermediate  types.  The  hypothesis  of  spontaneous

generation formerly widely accepted, was experimentally disproved except as

regards the hypothetical origin of the simplest forms of life. All this made it

natural to suppose that the various animals and plants existing now or in the

past were all descended from a common ancestry, and had become gradually

differentiated as a result of variation in hereditable characters.

                                                                                          1
  The doctrine of evolution, in the above sense, is now generally accepted.

But the particular motive force which Darwin suggested, namely the struggle

for existence and the survival of the fittest, is not nearly so popular among

biologists as it was fifty years ago. Darwin’s theory was an extension, to the

whole of life, of laissez-faire economics; now that this kind of economics, and

the associated kind of politics, are out of fashion, people prefer other ways of

accounting for biological changes. Where such changes have already occurred

in part of a given stock, the Darwinian mechanism is still allowed to explain

why  one  side  gets  the  victory  in  a  contest  between  the  mutants  and  the

conservatives.  But  whereas  the  earlier  Darwinians  thought  that  minute

changes occurred, by selection, in each generation, some modern Mendelians

lay stress on comparatively large changes occurring only occasionally, and

their hope is to find a more or less mechanical theory as to the origin of such

changes. The power of altering genes experimentally by X-rays gives hope of

progress in this direction.  There are some who hold that the fundamental concept in biology should

be that of “organism”, and that, on this account, biology can never be reduced

to  chemistry  and  physics.  This  view  is  derived  from  Aristotle,  and  was

encouraged by the Hegelian philosophy, though Hegel himself does not use

the word “organism”. It is, to my mind, an erroneous view, and one which, in

so far as it prevails, is a barrier to scientific progress. But as it is still fairly

widely advocated, it will be well to examine it.

  Let us first try to state the logical essence of the theory. It holds that the

body of an animal or plant is a unity, in the sense that the laws governing the

behaviour of the parts can only be stated by considering the place of the parts

in the whole. An amputated limb, or an eye removed from its socket, no

longer serves the purposes that it served when joined to a body: the limb

cannot walk and the eye cannot see. This, of course, is true, but is not a

peculiarity of living things: your wireless cannot tell you the news when the

current is switched off. And properly speaking it is not the eye that sees; it is

the brain, or the mind. The eye is merely a transmitter and transformer of

radiant energy. But the “organic” view would hold that the way in which the

eye deals with radiant energy cannot be understood without taking account of

the rest of the body, and of the body as a single whole.

  The opposite view, which I should regard as correct, would say that, to

understand  what  an  eye  does,  you  need  to  know,  in  addition  to  its  own

structure, only the inflow and outflow of energy. The outer surface of the eye

is exposed to certain influences from without, which set up processes that are

transmitted from the inner surface of the eye to the nerves. The mechanistic

view holds that, if an eye is separated from its body, but preserves its structure

and chemical constitution, and is provided with artificial nerves to drain away

the impulses received from incident light, it will behave as it would if it were

still in its proper place. The experiment is one which cannot be fully carried

out, because an isolated eye will soon decay, and because, owing to our lack of

skill, artificial substitutes for nerves cannot have quite the same properties as

actual nerves. But to an increasing extent similar experiments are becoming

possible; for instance, frogs’ hearts can be kept beating after being extracted

from the frogs.    Speaking  generally,  scientific  progress  has  been  made  by  analysis  and

artificial isolation. It may be that, as quantum theory suggests, there are limits

to the legitimacy of this process, but if it were not usually or approximately

valid scientific knowledge would be impossible. It is therefore in any case

prudent  to  adopt  the  mechanistic  view  as  a  working  hypothesis,  to  be

abandoned only where there is clear evidence against it. As regards biological

phenomena, such evidence, so far, is entirely absent.

  To  sum  up:  Life  is  only known  to  occur  on  this  planet;  it  is  very

improbable that it occurs on any other planet of the solar system, and it seems

likely that the great majority of stars have no planets. Life, therefore, is almost

certainly a very rare phenomenon. Even on the earth it is transitory: at first

the  earth  was  too  hot,  and  in  the  end  it  will  be  too  cold.  Some  highly

conjectural dates are suggested in Spencer Jones’s Worlds Without End (p. 19).

The age of the earth is probably less than 3,000 million years; the beginnings

of life may be placed at about 1,700 million years ago. Mammals began about

60 million years ago; anthropoid apes about 8 million, man about 1 million. It

is  probable  that  all  forms  of  life  on  earth  have  evolved  from  unicellular

organisms. How these were first formed we do not know, but their origin is

no more mysterious than that of helium atoms. There is no reason to suppose

living matter subject to any laws other than those to which inanimate matter

is subject, and considerable reason to think that everything in the behaviour

of living matter is theoretically explicable in terms of physics and chemistry.1 The present state of scientific opinion on this subject may be studied in Julian Huxley’s Evolution: a

    Modern Synthesis.                                          V 


  The Physiology of Sensation and Volition


FROM  the  standpoint  of  orthodox  psychology,  there  are  two  boundaries

between the mental and physical, namely sensation and volition. “Sensation”

may be defined as the first mental effect of a physical cause, “volition” as the

last  mental  cause  of  a  physical  effect.  I  am  not  maintaining  that  these

definitions  will  prove  ultimately  satisfactory,  but  only  that  they  may  be

adopted as a guide in our preliminary survey. In the present chapter I shall not

be concerned with either sensation or volition themselves, since they belong

to psychology; I shall be concerned only with the physiological antecedents

and concomitants of sensation, and with the physiological concomitants and

consequents of volition. Before considering what science has to say, it will be

worth while to look at the matter first from a common-sense point of view.

    Suppose  something  is  said  to  you,  and  in  consequence  you  take  some

action; for example, you may be a soldier obeying the word of command.

Physics studies the sound waves that travel through the air until they reach

the ear; physiology studies the consequent event in the ear and nerves and

brain, up to the moment when you hear the sound; psychology studies the

sensation of hearing and the consequent volition; physiology then resumes the

study of the process, and considers the outgoing chain of events from the

brain to the muscles and the bodily movement expressing the volition; from

that  point  onward,  what  happens  is  again  part  of  the  subject-matter  of

physics. The problem of the relation of mind and matter, which is part of the

stock in trade of philosophy, comes to a head in the transition from events in

the brain to the sensation, and from the volition to other events in the brain. It

is thus a two-fold problem: how does matter affect mind in sensation, and

how does mind affect matter in volition? I do not propose to consider this

problem at this stage; I mention it now only to show the relevance of certain

parts of physiology to questions which philosophy must discuss.

  The physiological processes which precede and accompany sensation areadmirably set forth in Adrian’s book The Basis of Sensation: The Action of the

Sense Organs (London, 1928). As every one knows, there are two sorts of

nerve fibres, those that carry messages into the brain, and those that carry

messages  out  of  it.  The  former  alone  are  concerned  in  the  physiology  of

sensation. Isolated nerves can be stimulated artificially by an electric current,

and  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  processes  thus  set  up  are

essentially similar to those set up naturally in nerves that are still in place in a

living  body.  When  an  isolated  nerve  is  thus  stimulated  in  an  adequate

manner, a disturbance is set up which travels along the nerve at a speed of

about 220 miles an hour (100 metres a second). Each nerve consists of a bundle

of nerve fibres running from the surface of the body to the brain or the spinal

chord.  The  nerve  fibres  which  carry  messages  to  the  brain  are  called

“afférent”, those which carry messages from the brain are called “efferent”. A

nerve usually contains both afferent and efferent fibres. Broadly speaking, the

afferent fibres start from sense-organs and the efferent fibres end in muscles.

  The response of a nerve fibre to a stimulus is of what is called the “all-or-

nothing” type, like the response of a gun to pressure on the trigger. A slight

pressure on the trigger produces no result, but a pressure which is sufficiently

great produces a specific result which is the same however great the pressure

may  be  (within  limits).  Similarly  when  a  nerve  fibre  is  stimulated  very

slightly, or for a very brief period (less than ·00001 of a second), there is no

result, but when the stimulus is sufficient a current travels along the nerve

fibre for a very brief period (a few thousandths of a second), after which the

nerve fibre is “tired” and will not transmit another current until it is rested. At

first, for two or three thousandths of a second, the nerve fibre is completely

refractory; then it recovers gradually. During the period of recovery a given

stimulus produces a smaller response, and one which travels more slowly.

Recovery is complete after about a tenth of a second. The result is that a

constant stimulus does not produce a constant state of excitement in the nerve

fibres, but a series of responses with quiescent periods between. The messages

that reach the brain are, as Adrian puts it, like a stream of bullets from a

machine gun, not like a continuous stream of water.

  It is supposed that in the brain, or the spinal column, there is a conversemechanism which reconverts the discrete impulses into a continuous process,

but this, so far, is purely hypothetical.

  Owing  to  the  discontinuous  nature  of  the  response  to  a  stimulus,  the

response will be exactly the same to a constant stimulus as to one which is

intermittent with a frequency adapted to the period of recovery in the nerve.

It would seem to follow that there can be no means of knowing whether the

stimulus is constant or intermittent. But this is not altogether true. Suppose,

for instance, that you are looking at a bright spot of light: if you could keep

your eyes absolutely fixed, your sensations would be the same if the light

flickered with appropriate rapidity as they would be if the light were steady.

But in fact it is impossible to keep the eyes quite still, and therefore fresh

unfatigued nerves are perpetually being brought into play.

  A remarkable fact, which might seem to put a limit on the informative

value of sensations, is, that the response of the nerve fibre is the same to any

stimulus of sufficient strength and duration: there is just one message, and

only one, that a given nerve fibre can transmit. But consider the analogy of a

typewriter: if you press a given letter, only one result occurs, and yet the

typewriter as a whole can transmit any information, however complicated.

  The mechanism of the efferent nerve fibres appears to be just the same as

that of the afferent nerve fibres; the messages that travel from the brain to the

muscles have the same jerky character as those that travel from the sense-

organs to the brain.

  But  the  most  interesting  question  remains:  what  goes  on  in  the  brain

between the arrival of a message by the afferent nerves and the departure of a

message by the efferent nerves? Suppose you read a telegram saying “all your

property has been destroyed in an earthquake”, and you exclaim “heavens! I

am ruined”. We feel, rightly or wrongly, that we know the psychological links,

after a fashion, by introspection, but everybody is agreed that there must also

be physiological links. The current brought into the vision centre by the optic

nerve must pass thence to the speech centre, and then stimulate the muscles

which produce your exclamation. How this happens is still obscure. But it

seems clear that, from a physiological point of view, there is a unitary process

from the physical stimulus to the muscular response. In man this process maybe  rendered  exceedingly  complex  by  the  operation of  acquired  habits,

especially  language  habits,  but  in  some  less  highly  organized  animals  the

process  is  simpler  and  less  difficult  to  study;  the  reason  why  the  moth

approaches the flame, for example, is fairly well understood in physiological

terms.

  This raises a question of great interest, namely: is the process in the brain,

which connects the arrival of the sensory stimulus with the departure of the

message  to  the  muscles,  completely  explicable  in  physical  terms?  Or  is  it

necessary to bring in “mental” intermediaries, such as sensation, deliberation,

and volition? Could a superhuman calculator, with sufficient knowledge of

the  structure  of  a  given  brain,  predict  the  muscular  response  to  a  given

stimulus  by  means  of  the  laws  of  physics  and  chemistry?  Or  is  the

intervention of mind an essential link in connecting a physical antecedent (the

stimulus) with a physical consequent (a bodily movement)?

  Until more is known about the brain than is known at present, it will not

be possible to answer this question confidently in either sense. But there are

already some grounds, though not conclusive ones, for regarding what might

be called the materialist answer as the more probable one. There are reflexes,

where  the  response  is  automatic,  and  not  controlled  by  volition.  From

unconditioned reflexes, by the law of habit, conditioned reflexes arise, and

there  is  every  reason  to  regard  habit  as  physiologically  explicable.

Conditioned  reflexes  suffice  to  explain  a  great  part  of  human  behaviour;

whether there is a residue that cannot be so explained must remain, for the

present, an open question.

  At a later stage I shall maintain that there is no such gulf between the

mental and the physical as common sense supposes. I shall also maintain that,

even if the physiological causal chain from sense-organ to muscle can be set

forth in terms which ignore the psychological occurrences in the middle of the

chain, that will not prove that volitions are not “causes” in the only valid

sense of the word “cause”. But both of these contentions require considerable

argument and elucidation. For the present, I will only add a few words from

the standpoint of scientific common sense.

  If—as  seems  likely—there  is  an  uninterrupted  chain  of  purely  physicalcausation throughout the process from sense-organ to muscle, it follows that

human actions are determined in the degree to which physics is deterministic.

Now physics is only deterministic as regards macroscopic occurrences, and

even in regard to them it asserts only very high probability, not certainty. It

might be that, without infringing the laws of physics, intelligence could make

improbable  things  happen,  as  Maxwell’s  demon  would  have  defeated  the

second  law  of  thermo-dynamics  by  opening  the  trap-door  to  fast-moving

particles and closing it to slow-moving ones.

  On these grounds it must be admitted that there is a bare possibility—no

more—that, although occurrences in the brain do not infringe the laws of

physics,  nevertheless  their  outcome  is  not  what  it  would  be  if  no

psychological  factors  were  involved.  I  say  there  is  no  more  than  a  bare

possibility for several reasons. In the first place, the hypothesis supposes only

the microscopic laws preserved, not the macroscopic laws. But the evidence

for the macroscopic laws is better than the evidence for the microscopic laws,

and very strong grounds would be needed to justify a belief that on some

occasion  they  had  failed.  In  the  second  place,  all  the  occurrences  which

illustrate the connection of mind and matter are macroscopic: a volition, for

example,  results  in  a  perceptible  bodily  movement,  not  in  a  mere  atomic

change. In the third place, the study of processes in the nerves and brain, so

far,  has  shown  physical  causation  wherever  adequate  observation  was

possible: the region as to which there is still ignorance is one where very

minute phenomena are concerned, and where observation is very difficult.

There is therefore, so far, not the smallest positive reason for supposing that

there is anything about physical processes in the brain that involves different

macroscopic laws from those of the physics of inanimate matter.

    Nevertheless, for those who are anxious to assert the power of mind over

matter  it  is  possible  to  find  a  loophole.  It  may  be  maintained  that  one

characteristic of living matter is a condition of unstable equilibrium, and that

this condition is most highly developed in the brains of human beings. A rock

weighing many tons might be so delicately poised on the summit of a conical

mountain that a child could, by a gentle push, send it thundering down into

any of the valleys below; here a tiny difference in the initial impulse makes anenormous  difference  to  the  result.  Perhaps  in  the  brain  the  unstable

equilibrium is so delicate that the difference between two possible occurrences

in one atom suffices to produce macroscopic differences in the movements of

muscles. And since, according to quantum physics, there are no physical laws

to determine which of several possible transitions a given atom will undergo,

we may imagine that, in a brain, the choice between possible transitions is

determined by a psychological cause called “volition”. All this is possible, but

no more than possible; there is not the faintest positive reason for supposing

that anything of the sort actually takes place.

  On the evidence as it exists the most probable hypothesis is that, in the

chain of events from sense-organ to muscle, everything is determined by the

laws of macroscopic physics. To return to our previous illustration of the man

who reads a telegram and exclaims “I am ruined”: it seems probable that, if

you had a sufficiently minute knowledge of his brain-structure, and if you

were  a  sufficiently  good  mathematician,  you  could  foretell  that  when  the

shapes making the message, on the telegram came into his field of vision they

would set up a process ending in certain movements in his mouth, to wit,

those producing the sounds which we represent in writing as “I am ruined”. It

is here assumed that you could make this prophecy without knowing English;

it should not be necessary for you to know the meaning either of the telegram

or of his exclamation. The difference between a man knowing English and a

man not knowing it should, on the physiological side, consist in the presence

in one case, and absence in the other, of connections between the afferent

nerves when stimulated by the hearing or reading of English words, and the

efferent  nerves  producing  the  appropriate  response.  This  difference  we

suppose visible to a hypothetical observer without his having to know the

“meaning” either of the stimulus or of the response.

  This hypothesis, it must be admitted, does not seem very plausible, and I

am  far  from  asserting  dogmatically  that  it  is  true.  The  most  that  can

legitimately  be  asserted,  in  my  opinion,  is  that  it  is  the  right  working

hypothesis  for  a  man  investigating  the  physiological  concomitants  of

sensation  and  volition.  In  so  far  as  it  is  true,  it  may  help  him  to  make

discoveries; if, at some point, it is false, its falsehood is most likely to bediscovered by means of experiments suggested by the assumption of its truth.

In so far as the hypothesis is true, physiology is a science independent of

psychology; if at any point it is false, physiology ceases to be autonomous. As

a matter of practical policy, the physiologist does well to assume that his

science  is  autonomous  so  long  as  no  evidence  to  the  contrary  has  been

discovered.                                          VI 


                        The Science of Mind


PSYCHOLOGY as a science has suffered from being entangled with philosophy,

and even, until recent times, with theology. The distinction between mind and

matter, which was not drawn sharply by the pre-Socratics, became emphatic

in Plato, in whom it was connected with religion. Christianity took over this

aspect of Platonism, and made it the basis of much theological dogma. Soul

and body were different substances; the soul was immortal, while the body

decayed  at  death,  though  at  the  resurrection  we  should  acquire  a  new,

incorruptible  body.  It  was  the  soul  that  sinned,  and  that  suffered  eternal

punishment as the result of the Divine justice, or enjoyed eternal bliss as the

result of the Divine mercy. The existence of two sorts of substance, material

and mental, was accepted by all the leading scholastics; orthodoxy demanded

matter just as much as mind, since Christ’s Body was required for the dogma

of transubstantiation. Gradually the distinction of soul and body, which was

at first a recondite metaphysical subtlety, became a part of accepted common

sense, until, in our day, it is only a few metaphysicians who dare to question

it.

  The Cartesians increased the absoluteness of the distinction, by denying

all interaction between mind and matter. But their dualism was succeeded by

Leibniz’s monadology, according to which all substances are souls, and what

we  call  “matter”  is  only  a  confused  perception  of  many  souls.  After  him

Berkeley, for quite other reasons, also denied the existence of matter, and so

did—for  yet  other  reasons—Fichte  and  Hegel.  Meanwhile,  especially  in

eighteenth-century France, there were materialists who denied the existence

of the soul while upholding the existence of material substance. Hume alone,

among the great philosophers, denied substance altogether, and thus paved

the way for modern discussions of the distinction between the mental and the

physical.

  For my part, before attempting a metaphysical discussion of mind andmatter, I should prefer to investigate the distinction between the science of

psychology  and  the  science  of  physics.  It  is  clear  that  they  are  different

sciences, since in every university they are taught by different men. What

physicists have to teach is fairly clear, but what have the psychologists to

teach?

  There are those among psychologists who take a view which really denies

to  psychology  the  status  of  a  separate  science.  According  to  this  school,

psychology consists in the study of human and animal behaviour, and the

only thing that distinguishes it from philosophy is its interest in the organism

as  a  whole.  The  observations  upon  which  the  psychologist  must  rely,

according to this view, are such as a man might make on animals other than

himself; there is no science, say the adherents of this school, which has data

that  a  man  can  only  obtain  by  observation  of  himself.  While  I  admit  the

importance of what has been learnt by studying behaviour, I cannot accept

this view. There are—and I am prepared to maintain this dogmatically—many

kinds of events that I can observe when they happen to me, but not when they

happen  to  any  one  else.  I  can  observe  my  own  pains  and  pleasures,  my

perceptions, my desires, my dreams. Analogy leads me to believe that other

people have similar experiences, but this is an inference, not an observation.

The  dentist  does  not  feel  my  toothache,  though  he  may  have  admirable

inductive grounds for believing that I do.

  This suggests a possible definition of psychology, as the science of those

occurrences which, by their very nature, can only be observed by one person.

Such a definition, however, unless somewhat limited, will turn out to be too

wide in one direction, while too narrow in another. When a number of people

observe a public event, such as the bursting of a rocket or a broadcast by the

Prime Minister, they do not all see or hear exactly the same thing: there are

differences due to perspective, distance from the source of the sight or sound,

defects in the sense-organs, and so on. Therefore if we were to speak with

pedantic accuracy, we should have to say that everything that can be observed

is  private  to  one  person.  There  is  often,  however,  such  a  close  similarity

between  the  simultaneous  percepts  of  different  people  that  the  minute

differences can, for many purposes, be ignored; we then say that they are allperceiving  the  same  occurrence,  and  we  place  this  occurrence  in  a  public

world  outside  all  the  observers.  Such  occurrences  are  the  data  of  physics,

while those that have not this social and public character supply (so I suggest)

the data of psychology.

  According to this view, a datum for physics is something abstracted from

a system of correlated psychological data. When a crowd of people all observe

a rocket bursting, they will ignore whatever there is reason to think peculiar

and personal in their experience, and will not realize without an effort that

there is any private element in what they see. But they can, if necessary,

become aware of these elements. One part of the crowd sees the rocket on the

right,  one  on  the  left,  and  so  on.  Thus  when  each  person’s  perception  is

studied in its fullness, and not in the abstract form which is most convenient

for conveying information about the outside world, the perception becomes a

datum for psychology.

  But  although  every  physical  datum  is  derived  from  a  system  of

psychological data, the converse is not the case. Sensations resulting from a

stimulus within the body will naturally not be felt by other people; if I have a

stomach-ache I am in no degree surprised to find that others are not similarly

afflicted. There are afferent nerves from the muscles, which cause sensations

when the muscles are used; these sensations, naturally, are only felt by the

person concerned. It is only when the stimulus is outside the body of the

percipient, and not always even then, that the sensation is one of a system

which together constitutes one datum for physics. If a fly is crawling on your

hand, the visual sensations that it causes are public, but the tickling is private.

Psychology is the science which deals with private data, and with the private

aspects of data which common sense regards as public.

  To this definition a fundamental objection is raised by a certain school of

psychologists,  who  maintain  that  “introspection”  is  not  a  valid  scientific

method, and that nothing can be scientifically known except what is derived

from public data. This view seems to me so absurd that if it were not widely

held I should ignore it; but as it has become fashionable in various circles I

shall state my reasons for rejecting it.

  To begin with, we need a more precise definition of “public” and “private”data. “Public” data, for the purpose of those who reject introspection, are not

only data which in fact are shared by other observers, but also those which

might be so shared given suitable circumstances. Robinson Crusoe, on this

view, is not being unscientifically introspective when he describes the crops

he raised, although there is no other observer to confirm his narrative, for its

later parts are confirmed by Man Friday, and its earlier parts might have been.

But when he relates how he became persuaded that his misfortunes were a

punishment  for  his  previous  sinful  life,  he  is  either  saying  something

meaningless or telling what words he would have uttered if he had had any

one to speak to—for what a man says is public, but what he thinks is private.

To maintain that what he says expresses his thought is, according to this

school, to say something not scientifically verifiable and therefore something

which science should not say. To attempt—as Freud did—to make a science of

dreams is a mistake; we cannot know what a man dreams, but only what he

says he dreams. What he says he dreams is part of physics, since the saying

consists  of  movements  of  lips  and  tongue  and  throat;  but  it  is  a  wanton

assumption to suppose that what he says in professing to relate his dream

expresses an actual experience.

  We shall have to define a “public” datum as one which can be observed by

many people, provided they are suitably placed. They need not all observe it

at  once,  provided  there  is  reason  to  think  that  there  has  been  no  change

meanwhile: two people cannot look down a microscope at the same time, but

the enemies of introspection do not mean to exclude data obtained by means

of microscopes. Or consider the fact that, if you press one eyeball upwards,

everything looks double. What is meant by saying that things “look” double?

This can only be interpreted by distinguishing between the visual perception

and the physical fact, or else by a subterfuge. You may say: “When I say that

Mr. A. is seeing double, I say nothing about his perceptions; what I say means:

‘If Mr. A. is asked, he will say he is seeing double’.” Such an interpretation

makes it meaningless to inquire whether Mr. A. is speaking the truth, and

impossible to discover what it is that he thinks he is asserting.

  Dreams are perhaps the most indubitable example of facts which can only

be known by means of private data. When I remember a dream I can relate it,either truly or with embellishments; I can know which I am doing, but others

seldom  can.  I  knew  a  Chinese  lady  who,  after  a  few  lessons  in  psycho-

analysis, began to have perfect text-book dreams; the analyst was delighted,

but her friends were sceptical. Although no one except the lady could be sure

of the truth, I maintain that the fact as to what she had dreamed was just as

definitely such-and-such rather than so-and-so as in the case of a physical

phenomenon.

  We shall have to say: A “public” datum is one which generates similar

sensations in all percipients throughout a certain space-time region, which

must be considerably larger than the region occupied by one human body

throughout (say) half a second—or rather, it is one which would generate such

sensations  if  suitably  placed  percipients  were  present  (this  is  to  allow  for

Robinson Crusoe’s crops).

  This distinction between public and private data is one which it is difficult

to make precise. Roughly speaking, sight and hearing give public data, but not

always. When a patient is suffering from jaundice everything looks yellow,

but this yellowness is private. Many people are liable to a buzzing in the ears

which is subjectively indistinguishable from the hum of telegraph wires in a

wind. The privacy of such sensations is only known to the percipient through

the negative testimony of other people. Touch gives public data in a sense,

since different people can successively touch the same object. Smells can be so

public as to become grounds of complaint to the sanitary authority. Tastes are

public  in  a  lesser  degree,  for,  though  two  people  cannot  eat  the  same

mouthful, they can eat contiguous portions of the same viand; but the curate’s

egg shows that this method is not quite reliable. It is, however, sufficiently

reliable to establish a public distinction between good cooks and bad ones,

though here introspection plays an essential part, for a good cook is one who

causes pleasure to most consumers, and the pleasure of each is purely private.

  I have kept this discussion on a common-sense level, but at a later stage I

shall  resume  it,  and  try  to  probe  more  deeply  into  the  whole  question  of

private data as a basis for science. For the present I am content to say that the

distinction between public and private data is one of degree, that it depends

upon  testimony  which  bears  witness  to  the  results  of  introspection,  thatphysiology would lead to the expectation that sensations caused by a stimulus

inside a human body would be private, and, finally, that many of the facts of

which each one of us is most certain are known to us by means private to

ourselves. Do you like the smell of rotten eggs? Are you glad the war is over?

Have you a toothache? These questions are not difficult for you to answer, but

no  one  else  can answer  them  except  by  inferences  from  your  behaviour,

including your testimony.

  I conclude, therefore, that there is knowledge of private data, and that

there is no reason why there should not be a science of them. This being

granted, we can now inquire what psychology in fact has to say.

  There  is,  to  begin  with,  a  matter  of  which  the  importance  is  often

overlooked, and that is the correlation of physical occurrences with sensation.

Physicists and astronomers base their assertions as to what goes on in the

outer world upon the evidence of the senses, especially the sense of sight. But

not a single one of the occurrences that we are told take place in the physical

world is a sensation; how, then, can sensations confirm or confute a physical

theory? Let us take an illustration belonging to the infancy of science. It was

early discovered that an eclipse of the sun is due to the interposition of the

moon,  and  it  was  found  that  eclipses  could  be  predicted.  Now  what  was

directly verified when an eclipse occurred was a certain sequence of expected

sensations.  But  the  development  of  physics  and  physiology  has  gradually

caused  a  vast  gulf  between  the  sensations  of  an  astronomer  watching  an

eclipse and the astronomical fact which he infers. Photons start from the sun,

and when the moon is not in the way some of them reach an eye, where they

set up the kind of complicated process that we considered in the last chapter;

at last, when the process reaches the astronomer’s brain, the astronomer has a

sensation.

  The sensation can only be evidence of the astronomical fact if laws are

known  connecting  the  two,  and  the  last  stage  in  these  laws  must  be  one

connecting  stimulus  and  sensation,  or  connecting  occurrences  in  the  optic

nerve or the brain with sensation. The sensation, it should be observed, is not

at all like the astronomical fact, nor are the two necessarily connected. It

would be possible to supply an artificial stimulus causing the astronomer tohave an experience subjectively indistinguishable from what we call “seeing

the  sun”.  And  at  best  the  resemblance  between  the  sensation  and  the

astronomical fact cannot be closer than that between a gramophone record

and the music that it plays, or between a library catalogue and the books that

it  enumerates.  It  follows  that,  if  physics  is  an  empirical  science,  whose

statements can be confirmed or confuted by observation, then physics must be

supplemented  by  laws  connecting  stimulus  and  sensation. Now  such  laws

belong  to  psychology.  Therefore  what  is  empirically  verifiable  is  not  pure

physics in isolation, but physics plus a department of psychology. Psychology,

accordingly, is an essential ingredient in every part of empirical science.

  So far, however, we have not inquired whether there are any laws that

connect  one  mental  event  with  another.  The  laws  of  correlation  so  far

considered  have  been  such  as  connect  a  physical  stimulus  with  a  mental

response; what we have now to consider is whether there are any causal laws

which are entirely within one mind. If there are, psychology is to that extent

an autonomous science. The association of ideas, as it appears for example in

Hartley and Bentham, was a law of this kind, but the conditioned reflex and

the law of habit, which have taken its place, are primarily physiological and

only derivatively psychological, since association is thought to be caused by

the creation of paths in the brain connecting one centre with another. We may

still state the association of ideas in purely psychological terms, but when so

stated it is not a law as to what always happens, but only as to what is apt to

happen. It has not therefore the character that science hopes to find in a causal

law, or at least used to hope for before the rise of quantum theory.

  The same thing may be said of psycho-analysis, which aims at discovering

purely mental causal laws. I do not know of any psycho-analytic law which

professes to say what will always happen in such and such circumstances.

When a man, for example, suffers from claustrophobia, psycho-analysis will

discover this or that past experience which is held to explain his trouble; but

many people will have had the same experience without the same result. The

experience in question, accordingly, though it may well be part of the cause of

the phobia, cannot be its whole cause. We cannot, this being the case, find in

psychoanalysis any examples of purely psychical causal laws.  In the last chapter we suggested, as a probable hypothesis, the view that

all  bodily  behaviour  is  theoretically  explicable  in  physical  terms,  without

taking any account of the mental concomitants of physiological occurrences.

This  hypothesis,  it  should  be  observed,  in  no  way  decides  our  present

question. If A and B are two events in the brain, and if A causes B, then if a is

a mental concomitant of A, and b of B, it will follow that a causes b, which is

a purely mental causal law. In fact, causal laws are not of the simple form “A

causes B”, but in their true form the principle remains the same.

  Although, at present, it is difficult to give important examples of really

precise mental causal laws, it seems pretty certain, on a common-sense basis,

that there are such laws. If you tell a man that he is both a knave and a fool,

he will be angry; if you inform your employer that he is universally regarded

as  a  swindler  and  a  bloodsucker,  he  will  invite  you  to  seek  employment

elsewhere. Advertising and political propaganda supply a mass of materials

for the psychology of belief. The feeling one has in a novel or a play as to

whether the behaviour of the characters is “right” is based upon unformulated

knowledge of mental causality, and so is shrewdness in handling people. In

such cases, the knowledge involved is pre-scientific, but it could not exist

unless  there  were  scientific  laws  which  could  be  ascertained  by  sufficient

study.

  There are a certain number of genuine causal laws of the kind in question,

though so far they are mostly concerned with matters that have no great

intrinsic interest. Take, for example, after-images: you look fixedly at a bright

red object, and then shut your eyes; you see first a gradually fading red image,

and then a green image, of approximately the same shape. This is a law for

which  the  evidence  is  purely  introspective.  Or  again,  take  a  well-known

illusion:  In the figure the two horizontal lines are parallel, but they look as if they

approached each other towards the right. This again is a law for which the

evidence  is  purely  introspective.  In  both  cases  there  are  physiological

explanations, but they do not invalidate the purely psychological laws.

  I conclude that, while some psychological laws involve physiology, others

do not. Psychology is a science distinct from physics and physiology, and in

part independent of them. All the data of physics are also data of psychology,

but not vice versa; data belonging to both are made the basis of quite different

inferences in the two sciences. Introspection is valid as a source of data, and is

to a considerable extent amenable to scientific controls.

  There is much in psychology that is genuinely scientific although it lacks

quantitative  precision.  Take,  for  example,  the  analysis  of  our  spatial

perceptions, and the building up of the common-sense notion of space from its

sensational  foundations.  Berkeley’s  theory  of  vision,  according  to  which

everything looks flat, is disproved by the stereoscope. The process by which

we learn in infancy to touch a place that we see can be studied by observation.

So can volitional control: a baby a few months old can be watched learning

with delight to move its toes at will, instead of having to look on passively

while  they  wriggle  in  purely  reflex  movements.  When,  in  later  life,  you

acquire some skill, such as riding a bicycle, you find yourself passing throughstages: at first you will certain movements of your own body, in the hope that

they will cause the desired movements of the bicycle, but afterwards you will

the movements of the bicycle directly, and the necessary movements of your

body  result  automatically.  Such  experiences  throw  much  light  on  the

psychology of volition.

  Much  psychology  is  involved  in  connecting  sensory  stimuli  with  the

beliefs to which they give rise. I am thinking of such elementary occurrences

as  thinking  “there’s  a  cat”  when  certain  coloured  patches  in  motion  pass

across your field of vision. It is obvious that the same sensory stimulus could

be caused otherwise than by a cat, and your belief would then be false. You

may see a room reflected in a mirror, and think that it is “real”. By studying

such occurrences we become aware that a very large part of what we think we

perceive  consists  of  habits  caused  by  past  experience.  Our  life  is  full  of

expectations  of  which,  as  a  rule,  we  only  become  aware  when  they  are

disappointed. Suppose you see half of a horse that is just coming round a

corner; you may be very little interested, but if the other half proved to be

cow and not horse you would experience a shock of surprise which would be

almost  unendurable.  Yet  it  must  be  admitted  that  such  an  occurrence  is

logically possible.

  The connection of pleasure and pain and desire with habit-formation can

be  studied  experimentally.  Pavlov,  whose  work  nowhere  appeals  to

introspection, put a dog in front of two doors, on one of which he had drawn

an ellipse and on the other a circle. If the dog chose the right door he got his

dinner; if he chose the wrong one he got an electric shock. Thus stimulated,

the dog’s progress in geometry was amazingly rapid. Pavlov gradually made

the ellipse less and less eccentric, but the dog still distinguished correctly, until

the ratio of minor to major axis was reduced to 8:9, when the poor beast had a

nervous  breakdown.  The  utility  of  this  experiment  in  connection  with

schoolboys and criminals is obvious.

  Or, again, take the question: why do we believe what we do? In former

times, philosophers would have said it was because God had implanted in us a

natural light by which we knew the truth. In the early nineteenth century

they might have said it was because we had weighed the evidence and founda preponderance on one side. But if you ask a modern advertiser or political

propagandist he will give you a more scientific and more depressing answer.

A large proportion of our beliefs are based on habit, conceit, self-interest, or

frequent iteration. The advertiser relies mainly on the last of these, but if he is

clever  he  combines  it  skilfully  with  the  other  three.  It  is  hoped  that  by

studying the psychology of belief, those who control propaganda will in time

be able to make anybody believe anything. Then the totalitarian State will

become invincible.

  In regard to human knowledge there are two questions that may be asked:

first, what do we know? and second, how do we know it? The first of these

questions  is  answered  by  science,  which  tries  to  be  as  impersonal  and  as

dehumanized as possible. In the resulting survey of the universe it is natural

to start with astronomy and physics, which deal with what is large and what

is  universal;  life  and  mind,  which  are  rare  and  have,  apparently,  little

influence  on  the  course  of  events,  must  occupy  a  minor  position  in  this

impartial survey. But in relation to our second question, namely, how do we

come by our knowledge, psychology is the most important of the sciences. Not

only is it necessary to study psychologically the processes by which we draw

inferences, but it turns out that all the data upon which our inferences should

be based are psychological in character, that is to say, they are experiences of

single individuals. The apparent publicity of our world is in part delusive and

in part inferential; all the raw material of our knowledge consists of mental

events in the lives of separate people. In this region, therefore, psychology is

supreme.                                      part II


                                    Language                                          I 


                      The Uses of Language


LANGUAGE, like other things of mysterious importance, such as breath, blood,

sex,  and  lightning,  has  been  viewed  superstitiously  ever  since  men  were

capable of recording their thoughts. Savages fear to disclose their true name to

an enemy, lest he should work evil magic by means of it. Origen assures us

that pagan sorcerers could achieve more by using the sacred name Jehovah

than by means of the names Zeus, Osiris, or Brahma. Familiarity makes us

blind to the linguistic emphasis in the Commandment: “Thou shalt not take

the name of the Lord in vain.” The habit of viewing language superstitiously

is not yet extinct. “In the beginning was the Word”, says our version of St.

John’s Gospel, and in reading some logical positivists I am tempted to think

that their view is represented by this mistranslated text.

    Philosophers, being bookish and theoretical folk, have been interested in

language chiefly as a means of making statements and conveying information,

but this is only one of its purposes, and perhaps not the most primitive. What

is the purpose of language to a sergeant-major? On the one hand there is the

language  of  words  of  command,  designed  to  cause  identical  simultaneous

bodily movements in a number of hearers; on the other hand there is bad

language, designed to cause humility in those in whom the expected bodily

movements  have  not  been  caused.  In  neither  case  are  words  used,  except

incidentally, to state facts or convey information.

    Language can be used to express emotions, or to influence the behaviour

of  others.  Each  of  these  functions  can  be  performed,  though  with  less

adequacy,  by  pre-linguistic  methods.  Animals  emit  shrieks  of  pain,  and

infants, before they can speak, can express rage, discomfort, desire, delight,

and a whole gamut of feelings, by cries and gurgles of different kinds. A sheep

dog emits imperatives to his flock by means hardly distinguishable from those

that the shepherd employs towards him. Between such noises and speech no

sharp  line  can  be  drawn.  When  the  dentist  hurts  you,  you  may  emit  aninvoluntary groan; this does not count as speech. But if he says “let me know

if I hurt you”, and you then make the very same sound, it has become speech,

and  moreover  speech  of  the  sort  intended  to  convey  information.  This

example illustrates the fact that, in the matter of language as in other respects,

there is a continuous gradation from animal behaviour to that of the most

precise man of science, and from pre-linguistic noises to the polished diction

of the lexicographer.

  A sound expressive of emotion I shall call an “interjection”. Imperatives

and  interjections  can  already  be  distinguished  in  the  noises  emitted  by

animals.  When  a  hen  clucks  at  her  brood  of  chickens,  she  is  uttering

imperatives, but when she squawks in terror she is expressing emotion. But as

appears  from  your  groan  at  the  dentist’s,  an  interjection  may  convey

information, and the outside observer cannot tell whether or not it is intended

to do so. Gregarious animals emit distinctive noises when they find food, and

other members of the herd are attracted when they hear these noises, but we

cannot know whether the noises merely express pleasure or are also intended

to state “food here”.

    Whenever an animal is so constructed that a certain kind of circumstance

causes  a  certain  kind  of  emotion,  and  a  certain  kind  of  emotion  causes  a

certain kind of noise, the noise conveys to a suitable observer two pieces of

information, first, that the animal has a certain kind of feeling, and second,

that a certain kind of circumstance is present. The sound that the animal emits

is public, and the circumstance may be public—e.g. the presence of a shoal of

fish if the animal is a sea-gull. The animal’s cry may act directly on the other

members of its species, and we shall then say that they “understand” its cry.

But this is to suppose a “mental” intermediary between the hearing of the cry

and the bodily reaction to the sound, and there is no real reason to suppose

any  such  intermediary  except  when  the  response  is  delayed.  Much  of  the

importance of language is connected with delayed responses, but I will not yet

deal with this topic.

    Language has two primary purposes, expression and communication. In

its most primitive forms it differs little from some other forms of behaviour. A

man may express sorrow by sighing, or by saying “alas!” or “woe is me!” Hemay  communicate  by  pointing  or  by  saying  “look”.  Expression  and

communication are not necessarily separated; if you say “look” because you

see a ghost, you may say it in a tone that expresses horror. This applies not

only  to  elementary  forms  of  language;  in  poetry,  and  especially  in  songs,

emotion and information are conveyed by the same means. Music may be

considered  as  a  form  of  language  in  which  emotion  is  divorced  from

information, while the telephone book gives information without emotion.

But in ordinary speech both elements are usually present.

    Communication does not consist only of giving information; commands

and questions must be included. Sometimes the two are scarcely separable: if

you  are  walking  with  a  child,  and  you  say  “there’s  a  puddle  there”,  the

command “don’t step in it” is implicit. Giving information may be due solely

to the fact that the information interests you, or may be designed to influence

behaviour. If you have just seen a street accident, you will wish to tell your

friends about it because your mind is full of it; but if you tell a child that six

times seven is forty-two you do so merely in the hope of influencing his

(verbal) behaviour.

    Language has two interconnected merits: first, that it is social, and second

that  it  supplies  public  expression  for  “thoughts”  which  would  otherwise

remain  private.  Without  language,  or  some  pre-linguistic  analogue,  our

knowledge  of  the  environment  is  confined  to  what  our  own  senses  have

shown us, together with such inferences as our congenital constitution may

prompt; but by the help of speech we are able to know what others can relate,

and to relate what is no longer sensibly present but only remembered. When

we see or hear something which a companion is not seeing or hearing, we can

often make him aware of it by the one word “look” or “listen”, or even by

gestures. But if half an hour ago we saw a fox, it is not possible to make

another person aware of this fact without language. This depends upon the

fact that the word “fox” applies equally to a fox seen or a fox remembered, so

that our memories, which in themselves are private, are represented to others

by uttered sounds, which are public. Without language, only that part of our

life which consists of public sensations would be communicable, and that only

to those so situated as to be able to share the sensations in question.  It will be seen that the utility of language depends upon the distinction

between public and private experiences, which is important in considering the

empirical  basis  of  physics.  This  distinction,  in  turn,  depends  partly  on

physiology, partly on the persistence of sound-waves and light quanta, which

makes possible the two forms of language, speech and writing. Thus language

depends  upon  physics,  and  could  not  exist  without  the  approximately

separable  causal  chains  which,  as  we  shall  see,  make  physical  knowledge

possible,  and  since  the  publicity  of  sensible  objects  is  only  approximate,

language applying to them, considered socially, must have a certain lack of

precision.  I  need  hardly  say  that  I  am not  asserting  that  the  existence  of

language requires a knowledge of physics. What I am saying is that language

would  be  impossible  if  the  physical  world  did  not  in  fact  have  certain

characteristics, and that the theory of language is at certain points dependent

upon a knowledge of the physical world. Language is a means of externalizing

and publicizing our own experiences. A dog cannot relate his autobiography;

however eloquently he may bark, he cannot tell you that his parents were

honest  though  poor.  A  man  can  do  this,  and  he  does  it  by  correlating

“thoughts” with public sensations.

    Language  serves  not  only  to  express  thoughts,  but  to  make  possible

thoughts which could not exist without it. It is sometimes maintained that

there can be no thought without language, but to this view I cannot assent: I

hold  that  there  can  be  thought,  and  even  true  and  false  belief,  without

language.  But  however  that  may  be,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  all  fairly

elaborate thoughts require words. I can know, in a sense, that I have five

fingers,  without  knowing  the  word  “five”,  but  I  cannot  know  that  the

population  of  London  is  about  eight  millions  unless  I  have  acquired  the

language  of  arithmetic,  nor  can  I  have  any  thought  at  all  closely

corresponding  to  what  is  asserted  in  the  sentence:  “the  ratio  of  the

circumference  of  a  circle  to  the  diameter  is  approximately  3  ·  14159”.

Language,  once  evolved,  acquires  a  kind  of  autonomy:  we  can  know,

especially in mathematics, that a sentence asserts something true, although

what it asserts is too complex to be apprehended even by the best minds. Let

us consider for a moment what happens psychologically in such cases.  In mathematics, we start from rather simple sentences which we believe

ourselves capable of understanding, and proceed, by rules of inference which

we  also  believe  ourselves  to  understand,  to  build  up  more  and  more

complicated symbolic statements, which, if our initial assumptions are true,

must be true whatever they may mean. As a rule it is unnecessary to know

what they “mean”, if their “meaning” is taken to be a thought which might

occur in the mind of a superhuman mathematical genius. But there is another

kind of “meaning”, which gives occasion for pragmatism and instrumentalism.

According to those who adopt this view of “meaning”, what a complicated

mathematical sentence does is to give a rule for practical procedure in certain

kinds of cases. Take, for instance, the above statement about the ratio of the

circumference of a circle to the diameter. Suppose you are a brewer, and you

desire hoops of a given diameter for your beer barrels, then the sentence gives

you a rule by which you can find out how much material you will need. This

rule  may  consist  of  a  fresh  sentence  for  each  decimal  point,  and  there  is

therefore no need ever to grasp its significance as a whole. The autonomy of

language enables you to forego this tedious process of interpretation except at

crucial moments.

  There  are  two  other  uses  of  language  that  are  of  great  importance;  it

enables  us  to  conduct  our  transactions  with  the  outer  world  by  means  of

symbols  that  have  (1)  a  certain  degree  of  permanence  in  time,  (2)  a

considerable degree of discreteness in space. Each of these merits is more

marked in writing than in speech, but is by no means wholly absent in speech.

Suppose  you  have  a  friend  called  Mr.  Jones.  As  a  physical  object  his

boundaries are somewhat vague, both because he is continually losing and

acquiring electrons, and because an electron, being a distribution of energy,

does not cease abruptly at a certain distance from its centre. The surface of

Mr. Jones, therefore, has a certain ghostly impalpable quality, which you do

not like to associate with your solid-seeming friend. It is not necessary to go

into the niceties of theoretical physics in order to show that Mr. Jones is sadly

indeterminate. When he is cutting his toe nails, there is a finite time, though a

short one, during which it is doubtful whether the parings are still part of him

or not. When he eats a mutton chop, at what moment does it become part ofhim? When he breathes out carbon dioxide, is the carbon part of him until it

passes his nostrils? Even if we answer in the affirmative, there is a finite time

during which it is questionable whether certain molecules have or have not

passed beyond his nostrils. In these and other ways, it is doubtful what is part

of Mr. Jones and what is not. So much for spatial vagueness.

  There is the same problem as regards time. To the question “what are you

looking at?” you may answer “Mr. Jones”, although at one time you see him

full-face, at another in profile, and at another from behind, and although at

one time he may be running a race and at another time dozing in an arm-

chair. There is another question, namely “what are you thinking of?” to which

you may also answer “Mr. Jones”, though what is actually in your mind may

be very different on different occasions: it may be Mr. Jones as a baby, or Mr.

Jones being cross because his breakfast is late, or Mr. Jones receiving the news

that he is to be knighted. What you are experiencing is very different on these

various occasions, but for many practical purposes it is convenient to regard

them as all having a common object, which we suppose to be the meaning of

the name “Mr. Jones”. This name, especially when printed, though it cannot

wholly escape the indefiniteness and transience of all physical objects, has

much less of both than Mr. Jones has. Two instances of the printed words “Mr.

Jones” are much more alike than (for instance) the spectacle of Mr. Jones

running and the memory of Mr. Jones as a baby. And each instance, if printed,

changes much more slowly than Mr. Jones does: it does not eat or breathe or

cut its toe nails. The name, accordingly, makes it much easier than it would

otherwise be to think of Mr. Jones as a single quasi-permanent entity, which,

though untrue, is convenient in daily life.

    Language, as appears from the above discussion of Mr. Jones, though a

useful and even indispensable tool, is a dangerous one, since it begins by

suggesting  a  definiteness,  discreteness,  and  quasi-permanence  in  objects

which  physics  seems  to  show  that  they  do  not  possess.  The  philosopher,

therefore, is faced with the difficult task of using language to undo the false

beliefs that it suggests. Some philosophers, who shrink from the problems and

uncertainties  and  complications  involved  in  such  a  task,  prefer  to  treat

language  as  autonomous,  and  try  to  forget  that  it  is  intended  to  have  arelation to fact and to facilitate dealings with the environment. Up to a point,

such a treatment has great advantages: logic and mathematics would not have

prospered as they have done if logicians and mathematicians had continually

remembered that symbols should mean something. “Art for art’s sake” is a

maxim which has a legitimate sphere in logic as in painting (though in neither

case does it give the whole truth). It may be that singing began as an incident

in  courtship,  and  that  its  biological  purpose  was  to  promote  sexual

intercourse; out this fact (if it be a fact) will not help a composer to produce

good  music.  Language  is  useful  when  you  wish  to  order  a  meal  in  a

restaurant,  but  this  fact,  similarly,  is  of  no  importance  to  the  pure

mathematician.

  The  philosopher,  however,  must  pursue  truth  even  at  the  expense  of

beauty, and in studying language he must not let himself be seduced by the

siren songs of mathematics. Language, in its beginnings, is pedestrian and

practical, using rough and ready approximations which have at first no beauty

and only a very limited degree of truth. Subsequent refinements have too

often had aesthetic rather than scientific motives, but from the inquiry upon

which we are about to embark aesthetic motives must, however reluctantly,

be relentlessly banished.                                          II 


                        Ostensive Definition


“OSTENSIVE definition” may be defined as “any process by which a person is

taught  to  understand  a  word  otherwise  than  by  the  use  of  other  words”.

Suppose  that,  knowing  no  French,  you  are  shipwrecked  on  the  coast  of

Normandy: you make your way into a farmhouse, you see bread on the table,

and, being famished, you point at it with an inquiring gesture. If the farmer

thereupon says “pain”, you will conclude, at least provisionally, that this is the

French for “bread”, and you will be confirmed in this view if the word is not

repeated when you point at other kinds of eatables. You will then have learnt

the meaning of the word by ostensive definition. It is clear that, if you know

no French and your teacher knows no English, you must depend upon this

process  during  your  first  lessons,  since  you  have  no  linguistic  means  of

communication.

  The process of ostensive definition, however, is better exemplified when

the  learner  knows  no  language  at  all  than  when  he  already  possesses  a

language of his own. An adult knows that there are words, and will naturally

suppose that the French have a way of naming bread. His knowledge takes the

form: “‘Pain’ means ‘bread’”. It is true that, when you were shipwrecked, it

was by means of actual bread that you acquired this knowledge, but if you

had been shipwrecked with a dictionary the actual bread would not have been

necessary. There are two stages in the acquisition of a foreign language, the

first that in which you only understand by translating, the second that in

which you can “think” in the foreign language. In the first stage you know

that “pain” means “bread”, in the second stage you know that it means bread.

The infant, possessing as yet no language, has to begin with the second stage.

His success does credit to the capacities of the infant mind.

  Knowing a language has two aspects, passive and active: passive when

you understand what you hear, active when you can speak yourself. Dogs to

some degree achieve the former, and children usually achieve it some timebefore the latter. Knowing a language does not mean a capacity for explicit

explanation of what its words signify; it means that hearing the words has

appropriate effects, and using them has appropriate causes. I have sometimes,

in the course of travel, watched a quarrel springing up between two men

whose language I did not understand, and it was difficult not to feel their

mounting  excitement  ridiculous.  But  probably  the  first  was  accusing  the

second  of  being  the  offspring  of  parents  who  were  not  married,  and  the

second was retorting that the first’s wife was unfaithful. If I had understood,

the effect of the insult and the cause of the retort would have been obvious.

As this example illustrates, a person knows a language when hearing certain

sounds has certain effects and uttering them has certain causes. The process

by which, in the infant, the establishment of these causal laws is begun, is the

process of ostensive definition.

    Ostensive definition, in its earliest form, requires certain conditions. There

must  be  a  feature  of  the  environment  which  is  noticeable,  distinctive,

emotionally interesting, and (as a rule) frequently recurring, and the adult

must frequently utter the name of this feature at a moment when the infant is

attending to it. Of course there are risks of error. Suppose the child has milk in

a bottle. You may each time say “milk” or each time say “bottle”. In the former

case the child may think “milk” is the right word for a bottle of water; in the

latter case, he may think “bottle” the right word for a glass of milk. To avoid

such errors, you should in theory apply Mill’s inductive canons, remembering

that induction is a bodily habit, and only by courtesy a logical process. Instead

of saying merely “milk” or merely “bottle”, you should say “bottle of milk”;

you should then, on appropriate occasions, say “glass of milk” and “bottle of

water”. In time, by the use of Mill’s canons, the infant, if he survives, will

learn to speak correctly. But I am not giving practical pedagogic advice; I am

merely exemplifying a theory.

  The passive part in ostensive definition is merely the familiar business of

association or the conditioned reflex. If a certain stimulus A produces in a

child a certain reaction R, and is frequently experienced in conjunction with

the word B, it will happen in time that B will produce the reaction R, or some

part of it. As soon as this has happened, the word B has acquired a “meaning”for the child: it “means” A. The meaning may not be quite what the adult

intended: the adult may have intended “bottle” and the child may understand

the word as meaning milk. But that does not prevent the child from possessing

a word that has meaning; it only signifies that the child’s language is not yet

correct English.

  When  an  experience  causes  violent  emotion,  repetition  may  be

unnecessary. If a child, after learning to understand “milk”, is given milk so

hot as to scald his mouth, and you say “hot”, he may ever after understand

this word. But when an experience is uninteresting, many repetitions may be

necessary.

  The  active  part  in  the  learning  of  language  requires  other  capacities,

which however, are of less philosophic interest. Dogs cannot learn human

speech because they are anatomically incapable of producing the right sounds.

Parrots,  though  they  can  produce  more  or  less  the  right  sounds,  seem

incapable of acquiring the right associations, so that their words do not have

meaning. Infants, in common with the young of the higher animals, have an

impulse to imitate adults of their own species, and therefore try to make the

sounds that they hear. They may, on occasion, repeat sounds like a parrot, and

only  subsequently  discover  the  “meaning”  of  the  sounds.  In  that  case  the

sounds cannot count as words until they have acquired meaning for the child.

For  every  child  it  is  a  discovery  that  there  are  words,  i.e.  sounds  with

meaning.  Learning  to  utter  words  is  a  joy  to  the  child,  largely  because  it

enables him to communicate his wishes more definitely than he had been able

to do by crying and making gestures. It is owing to this pleasure that children

go through the mental labour and muscular practice involved in learning to

talk.

  In general, though not universally, repetition is necessary for an ostensive

definition,  for  ostensive  definition  consists  in  the  creation  of  a  habit,  and

habits, as a rule, are learned gradually. The exceptional cases are illustrated by

the proverbs “once bit, twice shy” and “the burnt child dreads the fire”. Apart

from  such  unusually  emotional  matters,  the  words  that  have  ostensive

definitions denote frequently recurring features of the environment, such as

the members of the family, foods, toys, pet animals, etc. This involves theprocess of recognition, or something of the kind. Although a child’s mother

looks somewhat different on different occasions, he thinks of her (when he

begins to think) as always the same person, and feels no difficulty in applying

the same name to her various epiphanies. Language, from the start, or rather

from the start of reflection on language, embodies the belief in more or less

permanent  persons  and  things.  This  is  perhaps  the  chief  reason  for  the

difficulty of any philosophy which dispenses with the notion of substance. If

you were to tell a child that his mother is a series of sensible impressions,

connected by similarity and causal relations, but without material identity,

and if by a miracle you could make him understand what you meant, he

would consider you demented and be filled with indignation. The process

called “recognition” is therefore one that demands investigation.

    Recognition, as a physiological or psychological occurrence, may or may

not be veridical. It fails in an every-day sense to be veridical when we mistake

one of two twins for the other, but it may be metaphysically misleading even

when it is correct from the standpoint of common sense. Whether there is

anything identical, and if so what, between two different appearances of Mr.

A, is a dark and difficult question, which I shall consider in connection with

proper names. For the moment I wish to consider recognition as a process

which actually occurs, without regard to its interpretation.

  The first stage in the development of this process is repetition of a learnt

reaction when the stimulus is repeated. It must be a learnt reaction, since

recognition must grow out of a process involving something, in later reactions

to a given stimulus, which was not present in the first reaction. Suppose, for

instance, you give a child a glass of milk containing bitter medicine: the first

time he drinks the doctored milk and makes a face, but the second time he

refuses the milk. This is subjectively something like recognition, even if the

second time he is mistaken in supposing that the milk contains medicine. It is

clear that this process may be purely physiological, and that it involves only

similarity, not identity, in stimulus and response. The learning of words by

ostensive definition can be brought wholly within this primitive stage. The

child’s world contains a number of similar stimuli to which he has learnt to

respond by similar noises, namely those that are instances of the word “milk”;it contains also another set of similar stimuli to which he has learnt to respond

by instances of the word “mother”. In this there is nothing involving any

beliefs or emotions in the child. It is only as a result of subsequent reflection

that the child, now become a philosopher, concludes that there is one word,

“mother”, and one person, Mother. I believe this first step in philosophy to be

mistaken. The word “mother”, I should say, is not a single entity, but a class of

similar noises; and Mother herself is also not a single entity, but a class of

causally connected occurrences. These speculations, however, are irrelevant to

the process of ostensive definition, which, as we have just seen, requires only

the  very  first  stage  on  the  road  towards  what  would  usually  count  as

recognition, namely similar learnt responses to similar stimuli.

  This primitive form of recognition is relevant in the analysis of memory

and  in  explaining  the  similarity  of  an  idea  to  an  impression  (to  borrow

Hume’s phraseology). When I remember a past event, I cannot make it itself

occur again, though I may be able to make a similar event occur. But how do I

know that the new event is similar to the old one? Subjectively, I can only

know by comparing an idea with an impression: I have an idea of the past

event and an impression of the present event, and I perceive that they are

similar. But this is not sufficient, since it does not prove that my idea of the

past event is similar to my impression of the past event when it existed. This,

in  fact,  cannot  be  proved,  and  is  in  some  sense  one  of  the  premisses  of

knowledge. But although it cannot be strictly proved, it can be in various

ways  confirmed.  You  may  describe  Mr.  A  while  he  is  present,  and  your

description may be recorded on a dictaphone. You may later describe him

from memory, and compare your new description with the dictaphone record.

If they agree closely, your memory may be accepted as correct.

  This illustration depends upon a fact which is fundamental in this subject,

namely, that we apply the same words to ideas as to the impressions which

are  their  prototypes.  This  explains  the  possibility  of  learning  a  word

ostensively by means of a single sensible occurrence. I saw Disraeli once, and

once only, and was told, at the moment, “that’s Dizzy”. I have since very

frequently remembered the occurrence, with the name “Dizzy” as an essential

part of the memory. This has made it possible for a habit to be formed byrepetition of the idea (in Hume’s sense), although the impression has never

been repeated. It is obvious that ideas differ from impressions in various ways,

but their similarity to their prototypes is vouched for by the fact that they

cause the same words. The two questions, “what are you looking at?” and

“what are you thinking of?” may, on two different occasions, be answered

identically.

  Let us consider the different kinds of words that are commonly learnt by

means of ostensive definitions. What I have in mind is a logical form of the

grammatical doctrine of parts of speech.

  We have already had occasion for a preliminary consideration of proper

names. I shall say no more about them at present, as they will be the subject

of a separate chapter.

  Next come names of species: man, woman, cat, dog, etc. A species of this

sort consists of a number of separate individuals, having some recognizable

degree of likeness to each other. In biology before Darwin, “species” was a

prominent  concept.  God  had  created  a  pair  of  each  species,  and  different

species could not interbreed, or, in the exceptional cases when they could,

such  as  horse  and  ass,  the  offspring  was  sterile.  There  was  an  elaborate

hierarchy of genera, families, orders, etc. This kind of classification, which

was and is convenient in biology, was extended by the scholastics to other

regions,  and  impeded  logic  by  creating  the  notion  that  some  ways  of

classifying  are  more  correct  than  others.  As  regards  ostensive  definition,

different experiences will produce different results. Most children learn the

word “dog” ostensively; some learn in this way the kinds of dogs, collies, St.

Bernards, spaniels, poodles, etc., while others, who have little to do with dogs,

may  first  meet  with  these  words  in  books.  No  child  learns  the  word

“quadruped” ostensively, still less the word “animal” in the sense in which it

includes oysters and limpets. He probably learns “ant”, “bee”, and “beetle”

ostensively, and perhaps “insect”, but if so he will mistakenly include spiders

until corrected.

  Names  of  substances  not  obviously  collections  of  individuals,  such  as

“milk”, “bread”, “wood”, are apt to be learnt ostensively when they denote

things familiar in every-day life. The atomic theory is an attempt to identifythis class of objects with the former, so that milk, for instance, is a collection

of milky individuals (molecules), just as the human race is a collection of men,

women,  and  children.  But  to  unscientific  apprehension  such  names  of

substances  are  not  to  be  assimilated  to  species  composed  of  separate

individuals.

  Next come qualities: red, blue, hard, soft, hot, cold, etc. Many of these are

usually learnt ostensively, but the less common ones, such as vermilion, may

be described by their similarities and differences.

  Names of certain relations, such as “up”, “down”, “right”, “left”, “before”,

“after”,  are  usually  learnt  ostensively.  So  are  such  words  as  “quick”  and

“slow”.

  There are a number of words of the sort that I call “egocentric”, which

differ in meaning according to the speaker and his position in time and space.

Among these the simple ones are learnt ostensively, for instance ‘I”, “you”,

“here”, “now”. These words raise problems which we will consider in a later

chapter.

  All the words I have mentioned hitherto belong to the public world. A

spectator  can  see  when  a  certain  feature  of  the  public  environment  is

attracting a child’s attention, and then mention the name of this feature. But

how  about  private  experiences,  such  as  stomach-ache,  pain,  or  memory?

Certainly  some  words  denoting  private  kinds  of  experience  are  learnt

ostensively. This is because the child shows in behaviour what he is feeling:

there is a correlation between e.g. pain and tears.

  There are no definite limits to what can be learnt by ostensive definition.

“Cross”, “crescent”, “swastika” can be learnt in this way, but not “chiliagon”.

But  the  point  where  this  method  of  learning  becomes  impossible  depends

upon the child’s experience and capacity.

  The words so far mentioned are all capable of being used as complete

sentences,  and  are  in  fact  so  used  in  their  most  primitive  employment.

“Mother”, “dog”, “cat”, “milk”, and so on, may be used alone to express either

recognition or desire. “Hard”, “soft”, “hot”, “cold” would be more naturally

used to express recognition than desire, and usually to express recognition

accompanied by surprise. If the toast is uneatable because it is old you maysay “hard”; if a ginger biscuit has lost its crispness by exposure to air you may

say “soft”. If the bath scalds you, you say “hot”; if it freezes you, you say

“cold”. “Quick” is frequently used by parents as an imperative; “slow” is used

similarly on roads and railways where there is a curve. The words “up” and

“down” are habitually used as complete sentences by lift-boys; “in” and “out”

are  similarly  used  at  turnstiles. “Before”  and  “after”  are  used  as  complete

sentences in advertisements of hair-restorers. And so on and so on. It is to be

noted that not only substantives and adjectives, but adverbs and prepositions,

may on occasion be used as complete sentences.

  I think the elementary uses of a word may be distinguished as indicative,

imperative, and interrogative. When a child sees his mother coming, he may

say  “mother!”;  this  is  the  indicative  use.  When  he  wants  her,  he  calls

“mother!”; this is the imperative use. When she dresses up as a witch and he

begins to pierce the disguise, he may say “mother?”; this is the interrogative

use. The indicative use must come first in the acquisition of language, since

the  association  of  word  and  object  signified  can  only  be  created  by  the

simultaneous presence of both. But the imperative use very quickly follows.

This is relevant in considering what we mean by “thinking of” an object. It is

obvious that the child who has just learnt to call his mother has found verbal

expression for a state in which he had often been previously, that this state

was associated with his mother, and that it has now become associated with

the  word  “mother”.  Before  language,  his  state  was  only  partially

communicable;  an  adult,  hearing  him  cry,  could  know  that  he  wanted

something, but had to guess what it was. But the fact that the word “mother!”

expresses his state shows that, even before the acquisition of language, his

state had a relation to his mother, namely the relation called “thinking of”.

This relation is not created by language, but antedates it. What language does

is to make it communicable.

    “Meaning”  is  a  word  which  must  be  interpreted  somewhat  differently

according as it is applied to the indicative or the imperative. In the indicative,

a word A means a feature B of the environment if, (1) when B is emphatically

present to attention, A is uttered, or there is an impulse to utter A, and (2)

when A is heard it arouses what may be called the “idea” of B, which showsitself either in looking for B or in behaviour such as would be caused by the

presence of B. Thus in the indicative a word “means” an object if the sensible

presence of the object causes the utterance of the word, and the hearing of the

word has effects analogous, in certain respects, to the sensible presence of the

object.

  The imperative use of a word must be distinguished according as it is

heard or uttered. Broadly speaking, an imperative heard—e.g. the word of

command in the army—is understood when it causes a certain kind of bodily

movement, or an impulse towards such a movement. An imperative uttered

expresses a desire, and therefore requires the existence of an “idea” of the

intended effect. Thus while it “expresses” something in the speaker, it “means”

the  external  effect  which  it  commands.  The  distinction  between  what  is

“meant” and what is “expressed” is essential in this use of words.

  We have been concerned, in this chapter, only with the most primitive

uses of the most primitive words. We have not considered the use of words in

narrative or in hypothesis or in fiction, nor have we examined logical words

such as “not”, “or”, “all”, and “some”; we have not inquired how learners

acquire the correct use of such words as “than” or “of”, which do not denote

recognizable features of any sensible environment. What we have decided is

that  a  word  may  become  associated  with  some  notable  feature  of  the

environment (in general, one that occurs frequently), and that, when it is so

associated, it is also associated with something that may be called the “idea”

or  “thought”  of  this  feature.  When  such  an  association  exists,  the  word

“means” this feature of the environment; its utterance can be caused by the

feature in question, and the hearing of it can cause the “idea” of this feature.

This  is  the  simplest  kind  of  “meaning”,  out  of  which  other  kinds  are

developed.                                          III 


                              Proper Names


THERE is a traditional distinction between “proper” names and “class” names,

which  is  explained  as  consisting  in  the  fact  that  a  proper  name  applies,

essentially, to only one object, whereas a class name applies to all objects of a

certain kind, however numerous they may be. Thus “Napoleon” is a proper

name, while “man” is a class name. It will be observed that a proper name is

meaningless unless there is an object of which it is the name, but a class name

is not subject to any such limitation. “Men whose heads do grow beneath their

shoulders” is a perfectly good class name, although there are no instances of

it. Again, it may happen that there is only one instance of a class name, e.g.

“satellite of the earth”. In such a case, the one member may have a proper

name (“the moon”), but the proper name does not have the same meaning as

the class name, and has different syntactical functions. E.g. we can say: “

‘Satellite of the earth’ is a unit class”, but we cannot say “the moon is a unit

class”, because it is not a class, or at any rate not a class of the same logical

type as “satellite of the earth”, and if taken as a class (e.g. of molecules) it is

many, not one.

  Many difficult questions arise in connection with proper names, Of these

there are two that are especially important: first, what is the precise definition

of proper names? second, is it possible to express all our empirical knowledge

in a language containing no proper names? This second question, we shall

find,  takes  us  to  the  heart  of  some  of  the  most  ancient  and  stubborn  of

philosophical disputes.

  In seeking a definition of “proper name”, we may approach the subject

from the point of view of metaphysics, logic, physics, syntax, or theory of

knowledge. I will say a few preliminary words about each of these.

  A. Metaphysical.—It  is  fairly  obvious  that  proper  names  owe  their

existence in ordinary language to the concept of “substance” —originally in

the  elementary  form  of  “persons”  and  “things”.  A  substance  or  entity  isnamed, and then properties are assigned to it. So long as this metaphysic was

accepted,  there  was  no difficulty  as  to  proper  names,  which  were  the

designations of such substances as were sufficiently interesting. Sometimes, it

is true, we should give a name to a collection of substances, such as France or

the sun. But such names, strictly speaking, were not necessary. In any case,

we could extend our definition to embrace collections of substances.

  But most of us, nowadays, do not accept “substance” as a useful notion.

Are we then to adopt, in philosophy, a language without proper names? Or

are  we  to  find  a  definition  of  “proper  name”  which  does  not  depend  on

“substance”? Or are we to conclude that the conception of “substance” has

been  too  hastily  rejected?  For  the  present,  I  merely  raise  these  questions,

without  attempting  to  answer  them.  All  that  I  want  to  make  clear  at  the

moment  is  that  proper  names,  as  ordinarily  understood,  are  ghosts  of

substances.

  B. Syntactical.—It is clear that a syntactical definition of “proper name”

must be relative to a given language or set of languages. In the languages of

daily life, and also in most of those employed in logic, there is a distinction

between subject and predicate, between relation-words and term-words. A

“name”  will  be,  in  such  languages,  “a  word  which  can  never  occur  in  a

sentence except as a subject or a term-word”. Or again: a proper name is a

word which may occur in any  form  of  sentence  not  containing  variables,

whereas  other  words  can  only  occur  in  sentences  of  appropriate  form.

Sometimes  it  is  said  that  some  words  are  “syncategorimatic”,  which

apparently means that they have no significance by themselves, but contribute

to the significance of sentences in which they occur. According to this way of

speaking, proper names are not syncategorimatic, but whether this can be a

definition is a somewhat doubtful question. In any case, it is difficult to get a

clear definition of the term “syncategorimatic”.

  The chief inadequacy of the above syntactical point of view is that it does

not, in itself, help us to decide whether it is possible to construct languages

with  a  different  kind  of  syntax,  in  which  the  distinctions  we  have  been

considering would disappear.

  C. Logical.—Pure logic has no occasion for names, since its propositionscontain only variables. But the logician may wonder, in his unprofessional

moments, what constants could be substituted for his variables. The logician

announces, as one of his principles, that, if “fx” is true for every value of “x”,

then “fa” is true, where “a” is any constant. This principle does not mention a

constant, because “any constant” is a variable; but it is intended to justify

those who want to apply logic. Every application of logic or mathematics

consists in the substitution of constants for variables; it is therefore essential,

if logic or mathematics is to be applied, to know what sort of constants can be

substituted for what sort of variables. If any kind of hierarchy is admitted

among  variables,  “proper  names”  will  be  “constants  which  are  values  of

variables of lowest type”. There are, however, a number of difficulties in such

a view. I shall not therefore pursue it further.

  D. Physical.—There are here two points of view to be considered. The first

is that a proper name is a word designating any continuous portion of space-

time which sufficiently interests us; the second is that, this being the function

of proper names, they are unnecessary, since any portion of space-time can be

described by its co-ordinates. Carnap (Logical Syntax, pp. 12–13) explains that

latitude  and  longitude,  or  space-time  co-ordinates,  can  be  substituted  for

place-names. “The method of designation by proper names is the primitive

one; that of positional designation corresponds to a more advanced stage of

science, and has considerable methodological advantages over the former.” In

the  language  he  employs,  co-ordinates,  he  says,  replace  such  words  as

“Napoleon” or “Vienna”. This point of view deserves full discussion, which I

shall undertake shortly.

  E. Epistemological.—We have here, first, a distinction not identical with

that  between  proper  names  and  other  words,  but  having  perhaps  some

connection  with  it.  This  is  the  distinction  between  words  having  a  verbal

definition and words having only an ostensive definition. As to the latter, two

points  are  obvious:  (1)  not  all  words  can  have  verbal  definitions;  (2)  it  is

largely arbitrary which words are to have only ostensive definitions. E.g. if

“Napoleon”  is  defined  ostensively,  “Joseph  Bonaparte”  may  be  defined

verbally as “Napoleon’s oldest brother”. However, this arbitrariness is limited

by the fact that, in the language of a given person, ostensive definitions areonly possible within the limits of his experience. Napoleon’s friends might

(subject to limitations) define him ostensively, but we cannot, since we can

never  say  truly  “that  is  Napoleon”.  There  is  obviously  here  a  problem

connected  with  that  of  proper  names;  how  closely,  I  shall  not  discuss  at

present.

  We have, it is clear, a number of problems to consider, and, as is apt to

happen  in  philosophy,  it  is  difficult  to  be  clear  as  to  what  precisely  the

problems are. I think we shall do best if we begin with Carnap’s substitution

of co-ordinates for proper names. The question we have to consider is whether

such a language can express the whole of our empirical knowledge.

  In Carnap’s system, a group of four numbers is substituted for a space-

time point. He illustrates by the example “Blue x, x, x, x, meaning “the
                                                            1234

position (x, x, x, x) is blue”, instead of “Blue (a)” meaning “the object a is
          1234

blue”. But now consider such a sentence as “Napoleon was in Elba during part

of 1814”. Carnap, I am sure, will agree that this sentence is true, and that its

truth is empirical, not logical. But if we translate it into his language it will

become  a  logical  truth.  “Napoleon”  will  be  replaced  by  “all  quartets  of

numbers enclosed within such-and-such boundaries”; so will “Elba”, and so

will “1814”. We shall then be stating that these three classes of quartets have a

common part. This, however, is a fact of logic. Clearly this is not what we

meant. We give the name “Napoleon” to a certain region, not because we are

concerned with topology, but because that region has certain characteristics

which make it interesting. We may defend Carnap by supposing, adopting a

schematic simplification, that “Napoleon” is to mean “all regions having a

certain quality say N”, while “Elba” is to mean “all regions having the quality

E”.  Then  “Napoleon  spent  some  time  in  Elba”  will  become:  “The  regions

having  the  quality  N  and  those  having  the  quality  E  overlap.”  This  is  no

longer a fact of logic. But it has interpreted the proper names of ordinary

language as disguised predicates.

  But our schematic simplification is too violent. There is no quality, or

collection of qualities, present wherever Napoleon was and absent wherever

he was not. As an infant, he did not wear a cocked hat, or command armies,

or fold his arms, while all these things were also done, at times, by otherpeople. How, then, are we to define the word “Napoleon”? Let us continue to

do our best for Carnap. In the moment of baptism, the priest decides that the

name “Napoleon” is to apply to a certain small region in his neighbourhood,

which has a more or less human shape, and that it is to apply to other future

regions  connected  with  this  one,  not  only  by  continuity,  which  is  not

sufficient  to  secure  material  identity,  but  by  certain  causal  laws,  those,

namely, which lead us to regard a body on two occasions as that of the same

person.  We  may  say:  Given  a  temporally  brief  region  having  the

characteristics of a living human body, it is an empirical fact that there are

earlier and later regions connected with this one by physical laws, and having

more or less similar characteristics; the total of such regions is what we call a

“person”, and one such region was called “Napoleon”. That naming is retro-

active  appears  from  a  plaque  on  a  certain  house  in  Ajaccio  saying:  “Ici

Napoleon fut conçu.”

  This may be accepted as an answer to the objection that, on Carnap’s

view, “Napoleon was once in Elba” would be a proposition of logic. It leaves,

however, some very serious questions. We saw that “Napoleon” cannot be

defined simply by qualities, unless we are to hold it impossible that there

should  be  two  exactly  similar  individuals.  One  of  the  uses  of  space-time,

however, is to differentiate similar individuals in different places. Carnap has

his sentences “Blue (3)”, “Blue (4)”, etc., meaning “the place 3 is blue”, “the

place 4 is blue”, etc. We can, it is supposed, distinguish blue in one place from

blue in another. But how are the places distinguished? Carnap takes space-

time for granted, and never discusses how space-time places are differentiated.

In fact, in his system, space-time regions have the characteristics of substance.

The  homogeneity  of  space-time  is  assumed  in  physics,  and  yet  it  is  also

assumed that there are different regions, which can be distinguished. Unless

we are to accept the objectionable metaphysics of substance, we shall have to

suppose the regions distinguished by differences of quality. We shall then find

that the regions need no longer be regarded as substantial, but as bundles of

qualities.

  Carnap’s co-ordinates, which replace names, are, of course, not assigned

quite arbitrarily. The origin and the axes are arbitrary, but when they arefixed, the rest proceeds on a plan. The year which we call “1814” is differently

named by the Mohammedans, who date from the Hejira, and by the Jewish

era, which dates from the Creation. But the year we call “1815” will have the

next number, in any system, to that given to what we call “1814”. It is because

co-ordinates are not arbitrary that they are not names. Co-ordinates describe a

point by its relations to the origin and the axes. But we must be able to say

“this is the origin”. If we are to be able to say this, we must be able to name

the origin, or to describe it in some way, and at first sight it might be thought

that any possible way would be found to involve names. Take, for instance,

longitude. The origin of longitude is the meridian of Greenwich, but it might

equally  well  be  any  other  meridian.  We  cannot  define  “Greenwich”  as

“longitude 0°, latitude 52°”, because, if we do, there is no means of ascertaining

where  longitude  0°  is.  When  we  say  “longitude  0°  is  the  longitude  of

Greenwich”, what we say is satisfactory because we can go to Greenwich and

say “this is Greenwich”. Similarly, if we live at (say) longitude 40° W., we can

say “the longitude of this place is 40° W.”, and then we can define longitude 0°

by relation to this place. But unless we have a way of knowing some places

otherwise  than  by  latitude  and  longitude,  latitude  and  longitude  become

unmeaning. When we ask “what are the latitude and-longitude of New York?”

we are not asking the same sort of question as we should be if we descended

into New York by a parachute and asked “what is the name of this city?” We

are  asking:  “How  far  is  New  York  west  of  Greenwich  and  north  of  the

equator?”  This  question  supposes  New  York  and  Greenwich  known  and

already named.

  It  would  be  possible  to  assign  a  finite  number  of  co-ordinates  at

haphazard, and then they would all be names. When (as is always done) they

are assigned on a principle, they are descriptions, defining points by their

relations to the origin and the axes. But these descriptions fail for the origin

and the axes themselves, since, as regards them, the numbers are assigned

arbitrarily. To answer the question “where is the origin?” we must have some

method of identifying a place without mentioning its co-ordinates. It is the

existence of such methods that is presupposed by the use of proper names.

  I conclude, for the moment, that we cannot wholly dispense with propernames  by  means  of  co-ordinates.  We  can  perhaps  reduce  the  number  of

proper names, but we cannot avoid them altogether. Without proper names

we can express the whole of theoretical physics, but no part of history or

geography; this, at least, is our provisional conclusion so far, but we shall find

reason to modify it later.

  Let us consider a little further the substitution of descriptions for names.

Somebody must be the tallest man now living in the United States. Let us

suppose he is Mr. A. We may then, in place of “Mr. A”, substitute “the tallest

man now living in the United States”, and this substitution will not, as a rule,

alter the truth or falsehood of any sentence in which it is made. But it will

alter the statement. One may know things about Mr. A that one does not

know about the tallest man in the United States, and vice versa. One may

know that Mr. A lives in Iowa, but not that the tallest man in the United

States lives in Iowa. One may know that the tallest man in the United States is

over ten years old, but one may not know whether Mr. A is man or boy. Then

there is the proposition “Mr. A is the tallest man in the United States.” Mr. A

may not know this; there may be a Mr. B who runs him close. But Mr. A

certainly knows that Mr. A is Mr. A. This illustrates once more that there are

some things which cannot be expressed by means of descriptions substituted

for names.

  The names of persons have verbal definitions in terms of “this”. Suppose

you are in Moscow and some one says “that’s Stalin”, then “Stalin” is defined

as “the person whom you are now seeing”—or, more fully: “that series of

occurrences,  constituting  a  person,  of  which this  is  one”.  Here  “this”  is

undefined, but “Stalin” is defined. I think it will be found that every name

applied to some portion of space-time can have a verbal definition in which

the  word  “this”,  or  some  equivalent,  occurs.  This,  I  should  say,  is  what

distinguishes the name of an historical character from that of an imaginary

person,  such  as  Hamlet.  Let  us  take  a  person  with  whom  we  are  not

acquainted, say Socrates. We may define him as “the philosopher who drank

the hemlock”, but such a definition does not assure us that Socrates existed,

and if he did not exist, “Socrates” is not a name. What does assure us that

Socrates existed? A variety of sentences heard or read. Each of these is asensible  occurrence  in  our  own  experience.  Suppose  we  find  in  the

Encyclopaedia  the  statement  “Socrates  was  an  Athenian  philosopher”.  The

sentence, while we see it, is a this, and our faith in the Encyclopaedia leads us

to say “this is true”. We can define “Socrates” as “the person described in the

Encyclopaedia  under  the  name  ‘Socrates’”.  Here  the  name  “Socrates”  is

experienced. We can of course define “Hamlet” in a similar way, but some of

the propositions used in the definition will be false. E.g. if we say “Hamlet was

a Prince of Denmark who was the hero of one of Shakespeare’s tragedies”, this

is false. What is true is: “ ‘Hamlet’ is a word which Shakespeare pretends to be

the name of a Prince of Denmark”. It would thus seem to follow that, apart

from such words as “this” and “that”, every name is a description involving

some this, and is only a name in virtue of the truth of some proposition. (The

proposition may be only “this is a name”, which is false if this is “Hamlet”.)

  We  must  consider  the  question  of  minimum  vocabularies.  I  call  a

vocabulary a “minimum” one if it contains no word which is capable of a

verbal  definition  in  terms  of  the  other  words  of  the  vocabulary.  Two

minimum  vocabularies  dealing  with  the  same  subject-matter  may  not  be

equal; there may be different methods of definition, some of which lead to a

shorter  residuum  of  undefined  terms  than  others  do.  The  question  of

minimum  vocabularies  is  sometimes  very  important.  Peano  reduced  the

vocabulary of arithmetic to three words. It was an achievement in classical

physics when all units were defined in terms of the units of mass, length, and

time. The question I wish to discuss is: What characteristics must belong to a

minimum vocabulary by means of which we can define all the words used in

expressing our empirical knowledge or beliefs, in so far as such words have

any precise meaning? More narrowly, to revert to a former example, what

sort of minimum vocabulary is needed for “Napoleon was in Elba during part

of 1814” and kindred statements? Perhaps, when we have answered this, we

shall be able to define “names”. I assume, in the following discussion, that

such historical-geographical statements are not analytic, that is to say, though

they are true as a matter of fact, it would not be logically impossible for them

to be false.

  Let us revert to the theory, which is suggested by what Carnap says, that“Napoleon” is to be defined as a certain region of space-time. We objected

that, in that case, “Napoleon was for a time in Elba” is analytic. It may be

retorted: yes, but to find out what is not analytic you must inquire why we

give  a  name  to  the  portion  of  space-time  that  was  Napoleon.  We  do  so

because it had certain peculiar characteristics. It was a person, and when adult

it wore a cocked hat. We shall then say: “This portion of space-time is a

person, and in its later portions it wears a cocked hat; that portion of space-

time is a small island; this and that have a common part”. We have here three

statements,  the  first  two  empirical,  the  third  analytic.  This  seems

unobjectionable. It leaves us with the problem of assigning co-ordinates, and

also with that of defining such terms as “person” and “island”. Such terms as

“person”  and  “island”  can  obviously  be  defined  in  terms  of  qualities  and

relations; they are general terms, and not (one would say) such as lead to

proper names. The assigning of coordinates requires the assigning of origin

and axes. We may, for simplicity, ignore the axes and concentrate on the

origin. Can the origin be defined?

    Suppose, for example, you are engaged in planetary theory, not merely in

a theoretical spirit, but with a view to the testing of your calculations by

observations. Your origin, in that case, will have to be defined by something

observable. It is universally agreed that absolute physical space-time is not

observable. The things we can observe are, broadly speaking, qualities and

spatio-temporal relations. We can say “I shall take the centre of the sun as my

origin”. The centre of the sun is not observable, but the sun (in a sense) is. It is

an empirical fact that I frequently have an experience which I call “seeing the

sun”, and that I can observe what seem to be other people having a similar

experience. “The sun” is a term which can be defined by qualities: round, hot,

bright, of such-and-such apparent size, etc. It happens that there is only one

object in my experience having these qualities, and that this object persists. I

can give it a proper name, “the sun”, and say “I shall take the sun as my

origin”. But since I have defined the sun by its qualities, it does not form part

of  a  minimum  vocabulary.  It  seems  to  follow  that,  while  the  words  for

qualities  and  spatio-temporal  relations  may  form  part  of  my  minimum

vocabulary, no words for physical spatio-temporal regions can do so. This is,in  fact,  merely  a  way  of  stating  that  physical  spatio-temporal  position  is

relative, not absolute.

  Assuming this correct so far, the question arises whether we need names

for qualities and spatio-temporal relations. Take colours, for example. It may

be said that they can be designated by wave-lengths. This leads to Carnap’s

contention that there is nothing in physics which cannot be known to a blind

man. So far as theoretical physics is concerned, this is obviously true. It is true

also, up to a point, in the empirical field. We see that the sky is blue, but a race

of  blind  men  could  devise  experiments  showing  that  transverse  waves  of

certain  wave-lengths  proceed  from  it,  and  this  is  just  what  the  ordinary

physicist quâ physicist, is concerned to assert. The physicist, however, does

not trouble to assert, and the blind man cannot assert, the proposition: “When

light of a certain frequency strikes a normal eye, it causes a sensation of blue.”

This statement is not a tautology; it was a discovery, made many thousands of

years after words for “blue” had been in common use.

  The question whether the word “blue” can be defined is not easy. We

might say: “Blue” is the name of colour-sensations caused by light of such-

and-such frequencies. Or we might say: “Blue” is the name of those shades of

colour which, in the spectrum, come between violet and green. Either of these

definitions might enable us to procure for ourselves a sensation of blue. But

when we had done so, we should be in a position to say: “So that is blue.” This

would be a discovery, only to be made by actually experiencing blue. And in

this statement, I should say, “that” is in one sense a proper name, though of

that peculiar sort that I call “egocentric”.

  We do not usually give names to smells and tastes, but we could do so.

Before going to America, I knew the proposition “the smell of a skunk is

disagreeable”. Now I know the two propositions: “that is the smell of a skunk”,

and “that is disagreeable”. Instead of “that”, we might use a name, say “pfui”,

and should do so if we often wished to speak of the smell without mentioning

skunks. But to any one who had not had the requisite experience, the name

would be an abbreviated description, not a name.

  I conclude that names are to be applied to what is experienced, and that

what  is  experienced  does  not  have,  essentially  and  necessarily,  any  suchspatio-temporal uniqueness as belongs to a space-time region in physics. A

word must denote something that can be recognized, and space-time regions,

apart from qualities, cannot be recognized, since they are all alike. They are in

fact logical fictions, but I am ignoring this for the moment.

  There are occurrences that I experience, and I believe there are others that

I do not experience. The occurrences that I experience are all complex, and

can be analysed into qualities with spatial and temporal relations. The most

important of these relations are compresence, contiguity, and succession. The

words that we use to designate qualities are not precise; they all have the sort

of vagueness that belongs to such words as “bald” and “fat”. This is true even

of the words that we are most anxious to make precise, such as “centimetre”

and “second”. Words designating qualities must be defined ostensively, if we

are  to  be  able  to  express  observations;  as  soon  as  we  substitute  a  verbal

definition,  we  cease  to  express  what  is  observed.  The  word  “blue,”  for

instance, will mean “a colour like that”, where that is a blue patch. How like

that it must be to be blue, we cannot state with any precision.

  This is all very well, but how about such words as “this” and “that”, which

keep on intruding themselves? We think of the word “this” as designating

something  which  is  unique,  and  can  only  occur  once.  If,  however,  “this”

denotes a bundle of cornpresent qualities, there is no logical reason why it

should not recur. I accept this. That is to say, I hold that there is no class of

empirically  known  objects  such  that,  if x  is  a  member  of  the  class,  the

statement “x precedes x” is logically impossible.

  We are accustomed to think that the relation “precedes” is asymmetrical

              1
and transitive. “Time” and “event” are both concepts invented with a view to

securing  these  properties  to  the  relation  “precedes”.  Most  people  have

discarded “time” as something distinct from temporal succession, but they

have  not  discarded  “event”.  An  “event”  is  supposed  to  occupy  some

continuous portion of space-time, at the end of which it ceases, and cannot

recur. It is clear that a quality, or a complex of qualities, may recur; therefore

an  “event”, if  non-recurrence  is  logically  necessary,  is  not  a  bundle  of

qualities. What, then, is it, and how is it known? It will have the traditional

characteristics of substance, in that it will be a subject of qualities, but notdefined when all its qualities are assigned. And how do we know that there is

any class of objects the members of which cannot recur? If we are to know

this, it might seem that it must be a case of synthetic a priori knowledge, and

that if we reject the synthetic a priori, we must reject the impossibility of

recurrence. We shall, of course, admit that, if we take a sufficiently large

bundle of qualities, there will be no empirical instance of recurrence. Non-

recurrence of such bundles may be accepted as a law of physics, but not as

something necessary.

  The view that I am suggesting is that an “event” may be defined as a

complete  bundle  of  compresent  qualities,  i.e.  a  bundle having  the  two

properties (a)  that  all  the  qualities  in  the  bundle  are  compresent,  (b)  that

nothing outside the bundle is compresent with every member of the bundle. I

assume that, as a matter of empirical fact, no event recurs; that is to say, if a

and b are events, and a is earlier than b, there is some qualitative difference

between a and b. For preferring this theory to one which makes an event

indefinable, there are all the reasons commonly alleged against substance. If

two events were exactly alike, nothing could ever lead us to suppose that they

were two. In taking a census, we could not count one apart from the other,

for,  if  we  did,  that  would  be  a  difference  between  them.  And  from  the

standpoint  of  language,  a  word  must  denote  something  that  can  be

recognized,  and  this  requires  some  recognizable  quality.  This  leads  to  the

conclusion that words such as “Napoleon” can be defined, and are therefore

theoretically unnecessary; and that the same thing would be true of words

designating events, if we were tempted to invent such words.

  I conclude that, if we reduce our empirical vocabulary to a minimum,

thereby excluding all words that have verbal definitions, we shall still need

words for qualities, compresence, succession, and observed spatial relations,

i.e.  spatial  relations  which  can  be  discriminated  within  a  single  sensible

complex. It is an empirical fact that, if we form a complex of all the qualities

that are all compresent with each other, this complex is found, so far as our

experience goes, not to precede itself, i.e. not to recur. In forming the time-

series, we generalize this observed fact.

  The nearest approach to proper names in such a language will be thewords for qualities and complexes of compresent qualities. These words will

have  the  syntactical  characteristics  of  proper  names,  but  not  certain  other

characteristics that we expect, for example that of designating a region which

is spatio-temporally continuous. Whether, in these circumstances, such words

are to be called “names”, is a matter of taste, as to which I express no opinion.

What are commonly called proper names—e.g. “Socrates”—can, if I am right,

be  defined  in  terms  of  qualities  and  spatio-temporal  relations,  and  this

definition is an actual analysis. Most subject-predicate propositions, such as

“Socrates is snub-nosed”, assert that a certain quality, named by the predicate,

is one of a bundle of qualities named by the subject—this bundle being a unity

in virtue of compresence and causal relations. Proper names in the ordinary

sense, if this is right, are misleading, and embody a false metaphysic.

  Note.—The  above  discussion  of  proper  names  is  not  intended  to  be

conclusive. The subject will be resumed in other contexts, especially in Part

IV, Chapter VIII.1 I.e. that if A precedes B, B does not precede A, and if A precedes B and B precedes C, then A

    precedes C.                                          IV 


                      Egocentric Particulars


I GIVE the name “egocentric particulars” to words of which the meaning varies

with the speaker and his position in time and space. The four fundamental

words of this sort are “I”, “this”, “here”, and “now”. The word “now” denotes a

different point of time on each successive occasion when I use it; the word

“here” denotes a different region of space after each time when I move; the

word  “I”  denotes  a  different  person  according  to  who  it  is  that  utters  it.

Nevertheless  there  is  obviously some  sense  in  which  these  words  have  a

constant meaning, which is the reason for the use of the words. This raises a

problem,  but  before  considering  it  let  us  consider  what  other  words  are

egocentric, and especially what words are really egocentric although intended

not to be so.

  Among obviously egocentric words are “near” and “far”, “past”, “present”,

and  “future”,  “was”,  “is”,  and  “will  be”,  and  generally  all  forms  of  verbs

involving  tense.  “This”  and  “that”  are  obviously  egocentric;  in  fact,  “this”

might be taken as the only egocentric word not having a nominal definition.

We could say that “I” means “the person experiencing this”, “now” means “the

time of this”, and “here” means “the place of this”. The word “this” is, in a

sense, a proper name, but it differs from true proper names in the fact that its

meaning is continually changing. This does not mean that it is ambiguous,

like  (say)  “John  Jones”,  which  is  at  all  times  the  proper  name  of  many

different men. Unlike “John Jones”, “this” is at each moment the name of only

one  object  in  one  person’s  speech.  Given  the  speaker  and  the  time,  the

meaning of “this” is unambiguous, but when the speaker and the time are

unknown we cannot tell what object it denotes. For this reason, the word is

more satisfactory in speech than in print. If you hear a man say “this is an age

of  progress”,  you  know  what  age  he  refers  to;  but  if  you  read  the  same

statement in a book it may be what Adam said when he invented the spade or

what was said by any later optimist. You can only decide what the statementmeans by finding out when it was written, and in this sense its meaning is not

self-contained but requires elucidation by extraneous information.

  One  of  the  aims  of  both  science  and  common  sense  is  to  replace  the

shifting subjectivity of egocentric particulars by neutral public terms. “I” is

replaced by my name, “here” by latitude and longitude, and “now” by date.

Suppose I am walking with a friend on a dark night, and we lose touch with

each other: he calls out “where are you?” and I reply “here I am”. Science will

not accept such language; it will substitute “At 11.32 p.m. on January 30, 1946,

B.R.  was  at  longitude  4°  3′  29″  W.  and  at  latitude  53°  16′  14″  N”.  This

information is impersonal: it gives a prescription by which a qualified person

who possesses a sextant and a chronometer, and has the patience to wait for a

sunny day, can determine where I was, which he may proclaim in the words

“here is where he was”. If the matter is of sufficient importance, say in a trial

for murder, this elaborate procedure may be worth the trouble it involves. But

its appearance of complete impersonality is in part deceptive. Four items are

involved: my name, the date, latitude, and longitude. In regard to each of

these there is an element of egocentricity which is concealed by the fact that,

for most purposes, it has no practical importance.

  From  a  practical  point  of  view,  the  impersonality  is  complete.  Two

competent persons, given time and opportunity, will both accept or both reject

a statement of the form: “At time t, A was at longitude B, latitude C.” Let us

call this statement “P”. There is a procedure for determining date, latitude, and

longitude,  which,  if  correctly  observed,  leads  different  people  to  the  same

result, in the sense that, if both say truly “he was here five minutes ago”, they

must  be  in  each  other’s  presence.  This  is  the  essential  merit  of  scientific

terminology  and  scientific  technique.  But  when  we  examine  closely  the

meanings of our scientific terms we find that the subjectivity we sought to

avoid has not been wholly banished.

  Let us begin with my name. We substitute “B.R.” for “I” or “you” or “he”,

as the case may be, because “B.R.” is a public appellation, appearing on my

passport and my identity card. If a policeman says “who are you?” I might

reply by saying “look! this is who I am”, but this information is not what the

policeman  wants,  so  I  produce  my  identity  card  and  he  is  satisfied.  Butessentially  I  have  only  substituted  one  sensible  impression  for another. In

looking  at  the  identity  card  the  policeman  acquires  a  certain  visual

impression,  which  enables  him  to  say  “the  name  of  the  accused  is  B.R.”

Another policeman, looking at the same identity card, will utter what is called

the “same” sentence, that is to say, he will emit a series of noises closely

similar to those emitted by the first policeman. It is this similarity, mistakenly

regarded as identity, which is the merit of the name. If the two policemen had

had to describe my appearance, the first, delaying me at the end of an all-day

walk in the rain, might say “he was a furious red-faced tramp”, while the

other might say “he was a benign old gentleman in evening dress”. The name

has the merit of being less variable, but it remains something known only

through the sensible impressions of individuals, of which no two are exactly

alike. We always come back to “this is his name”, where this is a present

occurrence. Or rather, to be exact, “his name is a class of sensible occurrences

all very similar to this”. We secure, by our procedure, a method of providing

sets of closely similar occurrences, but we do not wholly escape from “this”.

  There is involved here a principle of considerable scope and importance,

which deserves a more detailed exposition, to which we must now devote

ourselves.

  Let us begin with a homely illustration. Suppose you are acquainted with

a certain Mrs. A, and you know that her mother, whom you have never met,

is called Mrs. B. What does the name “Mrs. B” mean for you? Not what it

means for those who know her, still less what it means for her herself. It must

mean something definable in terms of your experience, as must every word

that you can use understandingly. For every word that you can understand

must either have a nominal definition in terms of words having ostensive

definitions,  or  must  itself  have  an  ostensive  definition;  and  ostensive

definitions, as appears from the process by which they are effected, are only

possible in relation to events that have occurred to you. Now the name “Mrs.

B” is something that you have experienced; therefore when you speak of Mrs.

B you may be mentally defining her as “the lady whose name is ‘Mrs. B’”. Or,

if one were to concede (what would not be strictly accurate) that you are

acquainted with Mrs. A, you might define “Mrs. B” as “the mother of Mrs. A”.In this way, although Mrs. B is outside your experience, you can interpret

sentences  in  which  her  name  occurs  in  such  a  way  that  your  lack  of

experience does not prevent you from knowing if the sentences are true.

  We  can  now  generalize  the  process  involved  in  the  above  illustration.

Suppose there is some object a which you know by experience, and suppose

you know (no matter how) that there is just one object to which a has a

known relation R, but there is no such object in your experience. (In the above

case, a is a Mrs. A, and R is the relation of daughter to mother.) You can then

give a name to the object to which a has the relation R; let the name be “b”.

(In our illustration it was “Mrs. B”.) It then becomes easy to forget that b is

unknown to you although you may know multitudes of true sentences about

b. But in fact, to speak correctly, you do not know sentences about b; you

know sentences in which the name “b” is replaced by the phrase “the object to

which a has the relation R”. You know also that there are sentences about the

actual object b which are verbally identical with those that you know about

the  object  to  which a  has  the  relation  R—sentences  pronounced  by  other

people in which “b” occurs as a name—but although you can describe these

sentences, and know (within common-sense limits) which are true and which

false, you do not know the sentences themselves. You may know that Mrs. A’s

mother is rich, but you do not know what Mrs. B knows when she says “I am

rich”.

  The result of this state of affairs is that our knowledge seems to extend

much further beyond our experience than it actually does. We may perhaps

distinguish, in such cases as we have been considering, between what we can

assert and what we intend. If I say “Mrs. B is rich”, I intend something about

Mrs. B herself, but what I actually assert is that Mrs. A has a rich mother.

Another person may know of Mrs. B, not as the mother of Mrs. A, but as the

mother of another daughter Mrs. C. In that case, when he says “Mrs. B is

rich”, he means “Mrs. C has a rich mother”, which is not what I meant. But

we both intend to say something about Mrs. B herself, though in this neither

of  us  is  successful.  This  does  not  matter  in  practice,  as  the  things  we

respectively say about Mrs. A’s mother or Mrs. C’s mother would be true of

Mrs. B if only we could say them. But although it does not matter in practice,it matters greatly in theory of knowledge. For in fact everybody except myself

is to me in the position of Mrs. B; so are the sun and moon, my house and

garden, my dog and my cat, Stalin and the King. All these are only known to

me by description, not by acquaintance. And the description has to be in

terms of my own experiences. So much for names. We must next consider

dates, in the endeavour to interpret our statement P.

  When I know a date, how can the date be defined in terms of my own

experience,  or,  in  other  words,  in  terms  which  have  for  me  an  ostensive

definition? Take, to begin with, the definition of “1946”. The public definition

is “1946 years after the official date of the birth of Christ”. It is agreed that this

cannot be the actual date of His birth, since Herod died in 4 B.C. Therefore

“1946”  really  means:  a  certain  number  of  years  after  the  time  when  the

Christian era was fixed. That is to say, if in a certain year it was decided that

the year should count as the year n A.D., then “1946” means “1946—n years

after that year”. This, we said, is the public meaning, but it is obviously not

my private meaning, since I do not know what year that was. What I know

through my own experience is that this year is called “1946” in the newspaper

and  in  my  diary  and  in  letters,  and  generally  wherever  a  date  is  to  be

expected; I can also remember that last year was called “1945”. I know what is

meant  by  “A.D.”,  and  am  therefore  aware  that  the  date  is  said  to  have  a

connection with certain historical events of which I know through reading the

Bible.

  In analysing the subjective meaning of a date, we come ultimately to some

experience of my own, either in present perception or in memory. Sometimes

this process is obvious: I want to know what day of the week it is, my diary

tells me that I dined with so-and-so on Wednesday, and my memory tells me

that I dined with him yesterday, whence I infer that to-day is Thursday. Or I

may hear the church bells and infer that it is Sunday. When I believe that to-

day is January 30, 1946, I do so because I have seen the date in the newspaper,

or because I remember that yesterday was the 29th, or for some such reason.

  Similar things are to be said about latitude and longitude. Even the words

that  we  most  desire  to  render  scientifically  impersonal  require  for  their

interpretation personal experiences of the interpreter. This is concealed fromour notice by what may be called “verbal” thought. The year 1946 is a difficult

object to think about, but the word “1946” is easy. I cannot in any obvious

sense experience 1946, but I experience “1946” whenever I hear or read it.

What I call “verbal” thought is characterized by using the name of an object as

a  means  of  describing  it.  When  we  mean  to  think  about  Napoleon,  we

substitute the description “the man whose name was ‘Napoleon’”. We can

experience the name “Napoleon”, and often we are unconscious of having

used “the man called ‘Napoleon’” as a substitute for “Napoleon”. Owing to

this unconscious substitution we never realize that about Napoleon himself

we know literally nothing, since we are not acquainted with him.

  To  return  to  egocentric  particulars,  the  problems  that  they  raise  are

specially important in relation to space and time. The quality “red” (say) has

no essential privacy; it is possible to doubt whether the sort of sensation that I

call “red” is similar to that which another man calls by the same name, but

there is no positive ground for supposing a difference. On the other hand,

what I call “here” is of necessity different from what anybody else calls “here”,

and what I now call “now” is of necessity different from what I call “now” on

another occasion, and from what another man calls “now” at other times. This

is the sharp point, in language, of the essential privacy of each individual’s

experience. Like Leibniz’s monads, we each mirror the world from our own

personal point of view. But in fact Leibniz did not carry his monadism far

enough, since he applied it only spatially. Not only is a man private from

other people, but he is also private from his past and future selves. It is not

“here” alone that is private, but also “now”; in fact “here-now” is what is

fundamental in our present problem. I-here-now know certain things; in some

degree, however inadequately, I mirror the universe by the present contents of

my mind. But is this possible? And how is it possible? And how far is it

possible? These are some of the fundamental problems with which the present

work is concerned. Continued analysis gradually narrows us down from the

astronomical universe to the mind of the astronomer, and from his mind as

exemplified in his whole life to his mind as it exists in a single moment. But

from this pin-point, this tiny camera obscura, if (as we all in fact believe) the

astronomer really knows what he is thought to know, we can throw the lightof knowledge over vast stretches of time and space, and discover the unreality

of the walls of our supposed subjective prison. In this process of escape the

interpretation of egocentric particulars is a very essential step.

  Before attempting a precise account of egocentric words, let us briefly

survey the picture of the world to which subsequent discussions will lead us.

  There is one public space, namely the space of physics, and this space is

occupied by public physical objects. But public space and public objects are

not  sensible;  they  are  arrived  at  by  a  mixture  of  inference  and  logical

construction. Sensible spaces and sensible objects differ from one person to

another, though they have certain affinities to each other and to their public

counter-parts.

                                1
  There is one public time, in which not only physical events, but mental

events also, have their place. There are also private times, which are those

given in memory and expectation.

  My whole private space is “here” in physical space, and my whole private

time is “now” in public time. But there are also private “heres” and “nows” in

private spaces and times.

  When your friend calls out in the dark “where are you?” and you answer

“here I am”, the “here” is one in physical space, since you are concerned to

give information which will help another to find you. But if, when alone, you

are looking for a lost object, and on finding it you exclaim “here it is”, the

“here”  may  be  either  in  public  space  or  in  your  private  space.  Of  course

ordinary  speech  does  not  distinguish  between  public  and  private  space.

Broadly, “here” is where my body is—my physical body if I mean “here” in

physical space, and my percept of my body if I mean “here” in my private

space. But “here” may be much more narrowly localized, for instance if you

are pointing out a thorn in your finger. One might say (though this would not

quite accord with usage) that “here” is the place of whatever sensible object is

occupying  my  attention.  This,  though  not  quite  the  usual  meaning  of  the

word,  is  the  concept  which  most  needs  discussing  in  connection  with  the

word “here”.

  “Now” has a similar two-fold meaning, one subjective and one objective.

When I review my life in memory, some of the things I remember seem a longtime ago, others more recent, but all are in the past as compared with present

percepts. This “past-ness”, however, is subjective: what I am remembering, I

remember now,  and  my  recollecting  is  a  present  fact.  If  my  memory  is

veridical, there was a fact to which my recollection has a certain relation,

partly  causal,  partly  of  similarity;  this  fact  was  objectively  in  the  past.  I

maintain  that,  in  addition  to  the  objective  relation  of  before-and-after,  by

which events are ordered in a public time-series, there is a subjective relation

of more-or-less-remote, which holds between memories that all exist at the

same objective time. The private time-series generated by this relation differs

not only from person to person, but from moment to moment in the life of

any one person. There is also a future in the private time-series, which is that

of expectation. Both private and public time have, at each moment in the life

of a percipient, one peculiar point, which is, at that moment, called “now”.

  It is to be observed that “here” and “now” depend upon perception; in a

purely material universe there would be no “here” and “now”. Perception is

not impartial, but proceeds from a centre; our perceptual world is (so to speak)

a perspective view of the common world. What is near in time and space

generally gives rise to a more vivid and distinct memory or percept than what

is far. The public world of physics has no such centre of illumination.

  In defining egocentric particulars, we may take “this” as fundamental, in a

sense  in  which  “this”  is  not  distinguished  from  “that”.  I  shall  attempt  an

ostensive definition of “this”, and thence a nominal definition of the other

egocentric particulars.

  “This” denotes whatever, at the moment when the word is used, occupies

the centre of attention. With words which are not egocentric, what is constant

is something about the object indicated, but “this” denotes a different object

on each occasion of its use: what is constant is not the object denoted, but its

relation to the particular use of the word. Whenever the word is used, the

person  using  it  is  attending  to  something,  and  the  word  indicates  this

something. When a word is not egocentric, there is no need to distinguish

between different occasions when it is used, but we must make this distinction

with egocentric words, since what they indicate is something having a given

relation to the particular use of the word.  We may define “I” as “the person attending to this”, “now” as “the time of

attending to this”, and “here” as “the place of attending to this”. We could

equally well take “here-now” as fundamental; then “this” would be defined as

“what is here-now”, and “I” as “what experiences this”.

  Can  two  persons  experience  the  same  “this”,  and  if  so,  in  what

circumstances?  I  do  not  think  this  question  can  be  decided  by  logical

considerations: a  priori,  either  answer  would  be  possible.  But  taking  the

question empirically, it has an answer. When the “this” concerned is what

common  sense  takes  to  be  a  percept  of  a  physical  object,  difference  of

perspective  makes  a  difference  in  the  percept  unavoidable,  if  the  same

physical object is concerned in the two cases. Two people looking at one tree,

or listening to the song of one bird, are having somewhat different percepts.

But two people looking at different trees might, theoretically, have exactly

similar  percepts,  though  this  would  be  improbable.  Two  people  may  see

exactly the same shade of colour, and are likely to do so if each is looking at a

continuous band of colours, e.g. those of the rainbow. Two people looking at a

square table will not see exactly similar quadrilaterals, but the quadrilaterals

they see will have certain geometrical properties in common.

  It thus appears that two people are more likely to have the same “this” if it

is somewhat abstract than if it is fully concrete. In fact, broadly speaking,

every increase of abstractness diminishes the difference between one person’s

world and another’s. When we come to logic and pure mathematics, there

need  be  no  difference  whatever:  two  people  can  attach  exactly  the  same

meaning  to  the  word  “or”  or  the  word  “371,294”.  This  is  one  reason  why

physics,  in  its  endeavour  to  eliminate  the  privacy  of  sense,  has  grown

progressively more abstract. This is also the reason for the view, which has

been widely held by philosophers, that all true knowledge is intellectual rather

than sensible, and that the intellect liberates while the senses keep us in a

personal prison. In such views there is an element  of  truth,  but  no  more,

except where logic and pure mathematics are concerned; for in all empirical

knowledge  liberation  from  sense  can  be  only  partial.  It  can,  however,  be

carried to the point where two men’s interpretations of a given sentence are

nearly certain to be both true or both false. The securing of this result is one ofthe aims (more or less unconscious) governing the development of scientific

concepts.1 This is subject to limitations connected with relativity. But as language and theory of knowledge

  are concerned with inhabitants of the earth, these may be ignored, since no two people have a

    relative velocity comparable to that of light.                                          V 


                        Suspended Reactions



Knowledge and Belief


WE have been concerned hitherto with what may be called the “exclamatory”

use of language, when it is used to denote some interesting feature of a man’s

present experience. So long as this use alone is in question, a single word can

function as a sentence in the indicative. When Xenophon’s Ten Thousand

exclaimed “Sea! Sea!” they were using the word in this way. But a single word

may also be used in other ways. A man found dying of thirst in the desert

may murmur “water!” and is then uttering a request or expressing a desire; he

may see a mirage and say “water?”; or he may see a spring and assert “water”.

Sentences  are  needed  to  distinguish  between  these  various  uses  of  words.

They are needed also—and this is perhaps their main use—to express what

may be called “suspended reactions”. Suppose you intend to take a railway

journey to-morrow, and you look up your train to-day: you do not propose, at

the moment, to take any further action on the knowledge you have acquired,

but  when  the  time  comes  you  will  behave  in  the  appropriate  manner.

Knowledge, in the sense in which it does not merely register present sensible

impressions, consists essentially of preparations for such delayed reactions.

Such preparations may in all cases be called “beliefs”, but they are only to be

called  “knowledge”  when  they  prompt successful  reactions,  or  at  any  rate

show themselves related to the facts with which they are concerned in some

way  which  distinguishes  them  from  preparations  that  would  be  called

“errors”.

  It is important not to exaggerate the role of language. In my view, there is

in pre-linguistic experience something that may be called “belief”, and that

may be true or false; there are also, I should say, what may be called “ideas”.

Language immensely increases the number and complexity of possible beliefsand ideas, but is not, I am convinced, necessary for the simplest beliefs and

ideas. A cat will watch for a long time at a mousehole, with her tail swishing

in savage expectation; in such a case, one should say (so I hold) that the smell

of mouse stimulates the “idea” of the rest of what makes up an actual mouse.

The  objection  to  such  language  comes,  it  seems  to  me,  from  an  unduly

intellectualist conception of what is meant by the word “idea”. I should define

an “idea” as a state of an organism appropriate (in some sense) to something

not  sensibly  present.  All  desire  involves  ideas  in  this  sense,  and  desire  is

certainly pre-linguistic. Belief also, in an important sense, exists in the cat

watching the mousehole, belief which is “true” if there is a mouse down the

hole and “false” if not.

  The word “mouse”, by itself, will not express the different attitudes of the

cat while waiting for her prey and when seizing it; to express these different

attitudes further developments of language are necessary. Command, desire,

and narrative all involve the use of words describing something not sensibly

present,  and  to  distinguish  them  from  each  other  and  from  the  indicative

various linguistic devices are necessary.

    Perhaps  the  necessity  to  assume  “ideas”  as  existing  antecedently  to

language may be made more evident by considering what it is that words

express.  The  dying  man  in  the  desert  who  murmurs  “water!”  is  clearly

expressing a state in which a dying animal might be. How this state should be

analysed is a difficult question, but we all, in a sense, know the meaning of

the  word  “thirst”,  and  we  all  know  that  what  this  word  means  does  not

depend  for  its  existence  upon  there  being  a  word  to  denote  it.  The  word

“thirst” denotes a desire for something to drink, and such a desire involves, in

the sense already explained, the presence of the “idea” of drink. What would

commonly be called a man’s “mental” life is entirely made up of ideas and

attitudes towards them. Imagination, memory, desire, thought, and belief all

involve ideas, and ideas are connected with suspended reactions. Ideas, in fact,

are parts of causes of actions, which become complete causes when a suitable

stimulus is applied. They are like explosives waiting to be exploded. In fact,

the similarity may be very close. Trained soldiers, hearing the word “fire!”

(which already existed in them as an idea) proceed to cause explosions. Thesimilarity of language to explosives lies in the fact that a very small additional

stimulus can produce a tremendous effect. Consider the effects which flowed

from Hitler’s pronouncing the word “war!”

  It is to be observed that words, when learnt, can become substitutes for

ideas. There is a condition called “thinking of” this or that, say water when

you are in the desert. A dog appears, from its behaviour, to be capable of

being in this condition; so does an infant that cannot yet speak. When this

condition exists, it prompts behaviour having reference to water. When the

word “water” is known, the condition may consist (mainly, not wholly) in the

presence of this word, either overtly pronounced or merely imagined. The

word, when understood, has the same causal efficacy as the idea. Familiar

knowledge is apt to be purely verbal; few schoolboys go beyond the words in

reciting  “William  the  Conqueror  1066”.  Words  and  ideas  are,  in  fact,

interchangeable; both have meaning, and both have the same kind of causal

relations to what they mean. The difference is that, in the case of words, the

relation to what is meant is in the nature of a social convention, and is learnt

by hearing speech, whereas in the case of ideas the relation is “natural”, i.e. it

does  not  depend  upon  the  behaviour  of  other  people,  but  upon  intrinsic

similarity and (one must suppose) upon physiological processes existing in all

human beings, and to a lesser extent in the higher animals.

    “Knowledge”,  which  is,  in  most  forms,  connected  with  suspended

reactions, is not a precise conception. Many of the difficulties of philosophers

have  arisen  from  regarding  it  as  precise.  Let  us  consider  various  ways  of

“knowing” the same fact. Suppose that, at 4 p.m. yesterday, I heard the noise

of an explosion. When I heard it, I “knew” the noise in a certain sense, though

not in the sense in which the word is usually employed. This sense, in spite of

being unusual, cannot be discarded, since it is essential in explaining what is

meant by “empirical verification”. Immediately afterwards, I may say “that

was loud!” or “what was that noise?” This is “immediate memory”, which

differs  only  in  degree  from  sensation,  since  the  physiological  disturbance

caused  by  the  noise  has  not  yet  wholly  subsided.  Immediately  before  the

explosion, if I have seen the train fired which leads to a charge of explosive, I

may be in a state of tense expectation; this is, in a sense, akin to immediatememory, but directed to the near future. Next comes true memory: I now

remember the bang I heard yesterday. My state is now made up of ideas (or

images)  or  words,  together  with  belief  and  a  context  which  dates  the

occurrence  remembered.  I  can  imagine  a  bang  just  like  the  one  that  I

remember, but when I do this, belief and dating are absent. (The word “belief”

is  one  which  I  shall  discuss  later.)  Imagined events  are  not  included  in

knowledge or error, because of the absence of belief.

    Sensation, immediate expectation, immediate memory, and true memory

all give knowledge which is, in some degree and with appropriate limitations,

independent of extraneous evidence. But most of the knowledge of people

with any degree of education is not of any of these kinds. We know what we

have been told or have read in books or newspapers; here words come first,

and it is often unnecessary to realize what the words mean. When I believe

“William the Conqueror 1066”, what I am really believing (as a rule) is: “the

words ‘William the Conqueror 1066’ are true”. This has the advantage that the

words can be made sensible whenever I choose; the Conqueror is dead, but his

name comes to life whenever I pronounce it. It has also the advantage that the

name is public and the same for all, whereas the image (if any) employed in

thinking of William will differ from person to person, and is sure to be too

concrete. If (e.g.) we think of him on horseback, that will not suit “William

was born at Falaise”, because he was not born on horseback.

    Sentences heard in narrative are, of course, not necessarily understood in

this purely verbal manner; indeed a purely verbal understanding is essentially

incomplete. A child reading an exciting adventure story will “live through”

the adventures of the hero, particularly if the hero is of about the same age as

the reader. If the hero leaps a chasm, the child’s muscles will grow taut; if the

hero sees a lion about to spring, the child will hold his breath. Whatever

happens to the hero, the child’s physiological condition is a reproduction, on a

smaller scale, of the physiological condition of the hero. In adult life, the same

result can be produced by good writing. When Shakespeare’s Antony says “I

am  dying,  Egypt,  dying”,  we  experience  something  which  we  do  not

experience when we see in The Times a notice of the death of some person

unknown to us. One difference between poetry and bald statement is thatpoetry seeks to take the reader behind the words to what they signify.

  The process called “verification” does not absolutely necessitate (but often

involves) an imaginative understanding of words, but only a comparison of

words used in advance with words used when the fact concerned becomes

sensible. You say “this litmus paper will turn red”; I, later, say “this litmus

paper has turned red”. Thus I need only pass outside the purely verbal region

when I use a sentence to express a present sensible fact.

    “Knowledge”  is  a  vague  concept  for  two  reasons.  First,  because  the

meaning of a word is always more or less vague except in logic and pure

mathematics;  and  second,  because  all  that  we  count  as  knowledge  is  in  a

greater or less degree uncertain, and there is no way of deciding how much

uncertainty makes a belief unworthy to be called “knowledge”, any more than

how much loss of hair makes a man bald.

    “Knowledge” is sometimes defined as “true belief”, but this definition is

too wide. If you look at a clock which you believe to be going, but which in

fact has stopped, and you happen to look at it at a moment when it is right,

you  will  acquire  a  true  belief  as  to  the  time  of  day,  but  you  cannot  be

correctly said to have knowledge. The correct definition of “knowledge” need

not concern us at the moment; what concerns us now is belief.

  Let us take some simple sentence expressing something that is or may be a

sensible fact, such as “a loud bang is (or has been, or will be) taking place”.

We will suppose it a fact that such a bang occurs at a place P at time t, and

that the belief to be considered refers to this particular bang. That is to say we

will amend our sentence to “a loud bang occurs at place P at time t”. We will

call this sentence S. What sort of thing is happening to me when I believe this

sentence, or rather when I believe what it expresses?

  There are a number of possibilities. First, I may be at or near the place P at

the time t, and may hear the bang. In that case, at time t I have direct sensible

knowledge of it; ordinary language would hardly call this “belief”, but for our

purposes it is better to include it in the scope of the word. Obviously this sort

of knowledge does not require words. No more does the immediate memory

that subsists while I am still shaken by the noise. But how about more remote

memory?  Here,  also,  we  may  have  no  words,  but  an  auditory  imageaccompanied by a feeling which could be (but need not be) expressed in the

words  “that  occurred”.  Immediate  expectation  also  does  not  need  words.

When you watch a door about to be slammed by the wind, your body and

mind are in a state of expectation of noise, and if no noise resulted you would

experience a shock of surprise. This immediate expectation is different from

our ordinary expectations about events that are not imminent. I expect that I

shall  get  up  tomorrow  morning,  but  my  body  is  not  in  that  unpleasant

condition in which it will be to-morrow morning when I am expecting to get

up in a moment. I doubt whether it is possible, without words, to expect any

event not in the immediate future. This is one of the differences between

expectation and memory.

  Belief about something outside my own experience seems usually only

possible  through  the  help  of  language,  or  some  rudimentary  beginning  of

language. Sea-gulls and cannibals have a “food-cry”, which in the cannibals is

meant  to  give  information,  but  in  the  sea-gulls  may  be  a  spontaneous

expression of emotion, like a groan when the dentist hurts you. A noise of this

sort is a word to the hearer, but not to the utterer. An animal’s behaviour may

be affected by signs which have no analogy with language, for instance when

it  is  in  search  of  water  in  an  unknown  region.  If  a  thirsty  animal  runs

persistently down into a valley, I should be inclined to say that it “believes”

there is water there, and in such a case there would be non-verbal belief in

something that is as yet outside the animal’s experience. However, I do not

wish to become involved in a controversy as to the meaning of words, so I

will not insist upon the view that such behaviour shows “belief”.

  Among human beings, the usual way of acquiring beliefs as to what has

not been, and is not just about to be, experienced is through verbal testimony.

To revert to our sentence S, some person whom we believe to be truthful

pronounces it in our presence, and we then believe what the sentence asserts. I

want to inquire what is actually occurring in us while we are believing the

sentence.

  We must, of course, distinguish a belief as a habit from the same belief

when it is active. This distinction is necessary in regard to all habits. An

acquired habit consists in the fact that a certain stimulus, whenever it occurs,now produces a certain reaction which it did not produce in the animal in

question until the animal had had certain experiences. We must suppose that,

even  in  the  absence  of  the  stimulus  concerned,  there  is  some  difference

between an animal that has a certain habit and one that lacks it. A man who

understands the word “fire” must differ in some way from a man who does

not, even when he is not hearing the word. We suppose the difference to be in

the  brain,  but  its nature  is  hypothetical.  However,  it  is  not  a  habit  as  a

permanent character of an organism that concerns us, but the active habit,

which is only displayed when the appropriate stimulus is applied. In the case

we  are  investigating,  the  stimulus  is  the  sentence  S;  or  rather,  since  the

sentence may have been never heard before, and may therefore have had no

chance  to  generate  a  habit,  the  stimulus  is  the  succession  of  the  words

composing S, each of which, we are supposing, is familiar to the hearer, and

has  already  generated  the  habit  which  constitutes  understanding  of  its

meaning.

  It may happen, when we hear a sentence, that we do not trouble to think

what it means, but merely believe “this sentence is true”. With certain kinds of

sentences, this is the usual reaction; for example, when we are told someone’s

address and we only wish to write to him. If we wish to go and see him, the

meaning of the words becomes important, but for sending him a letter the

words alone are sufficient. When we believe “this sentence is true”, we are not

believing what the sentence asserts; if the sentence is in a language unknown

to us, we may believe that it is true without being able to find out what it

asserts—for example, if it is a sentence in a Greek Testament and we know no

Greek. I shall therefore ignore this case, and consider what happens when,

hearing S, we believe what S asserts.

  Let  us  somewhat  simplify  the  sentence,  and  suppose  that,  when  I  am

walking with a friend, he says: “There was an explosion here yesterday.” I

may believe him, or understand him without believing. Let us suppose that I

believe him, and that I believe what his words assert, not merely that the

words are true. The most important word in the sentence is “explosion”. This

word, when I am actively understanding it, rouses in me faint imitations of

the effects of hearing an actual explosion—auditory images, images of nervousshock,  etc.  Owing  to  the  word  “here”,  these  images  are  combined  in  my

mental picture with the surrounding scenery. Owing to the word “yesterday”,

they are combined with recollections of yesterday’s experiences. All this, so

far, is involved in understanding the sentence, whether or not it is believed. I

incline to the view that believing a sentence is a simpler occurrence than

understanding without belief; I think the primitive reaction is belief, and that

understanding  without  belief  involves  inhibition  of  the  impulse  to  belief.

What distinguishes belief is readiness for any action that may be called for if

what is asserted is a fact. Suppose for instance that an acquaintance of mine

has disappeared, and is known to have been hereabouts yesterday, then belief

may prompt me to search for signs of his remains, which I shall not do if I

understand without believing. If no such action is called for, there is at least

the  action  of  repeating  what  I  have  been  told  whenever  it  may  seem

appropriate to do so.

  From  all  this  it  appears  that,  when  I  believe  what  a  certain  sentence

asserts, the words, having had their intended effect, need no longer be present

to me. All that need exist is a state of mind and body appropriate to the fact

that the sentence asserts.

  It is an error to suppose that beliefs consist solely in tendencies to actions

of certain kinds. Let us take an analogy; a belief may be compared to a cistern

plus a pipe plus a tap. The tap can be turned on, and the belief can influence

action, but neither happens without an additional stimulus. When a man is

believing  something,  there  must  exist  in  him  either  appropriate  words  or

appropriate images, or, at the very least, appropriate muscular adjustments.

Any of these, given certain additional circumstances (which correspond to

turning on the tap), will produce action, and this action may be such as to

show an outside observer what it is that is being believed; this is particularly

the case if the action consists in pronouncing appropriate words. The impulse

to  action,  given  the  right  stimulus,  is  inherent  in  the  presence  of  words,

images, or muscular adjustments. To entertain an idea vividly and not act

upon it is difficult. If, alone at night, you read a story in which a man is

stabbed in the back, you will have an impulse to press your chair tight against

the wall. Booth the actor (the brother of Lincoln’s assassin), on one occasionwhen he was playing Macbeth under the influence of liquor, refused to be

killed, and chased Macduff murderously all through the stalls. It is unwise to

read a ghost story just before walking through a churchyard at midnight. As

these examples show, when an idea is entertained without belief, the impulse

to belief is not absent, but is inhibited. Belief is not something added to an

idea previously merely entertained, but something subtracted from an idea, by

an effort, when the idea is considered without being accepted.

  Another  example  is  the  difficulty  that  uneducated  people  feel  about

hypotheses. If you say “let us suppose so-and-so and see what comes of the

supposition”, they will tend either to believe what you suppose, or to think

that you are wasting your time. For this reason, reductio ad absurdum is a

form of argument that is repugnant to those who are not familiar with logic or

mathematics; if the hypothesis is going to be proved false, they cannot make

themselves hypothetically entertain it.

  I do not wish to exaggerate the scope of pre-linguistic belief: only very

simple  and  primitive  matters  can  be  dealt  with  in  the  absence  of  words.

Words are public, permanent (when written), and capable of being created at

will. These merits make it possible to have more complicated habits based on

words than any that could be based on wordless ideas or images. By acquiring

verbal habits we can prepare ourselves for actual situations when they arise.

What is more, knowledge can be externalized in books of reference, and need

then only exist in human beings when it is wanted. Consider the telephone

book: no one wants to know all its contents, or indeed any except at certain

moments.  The  people  who  compile  the  book  may  never  use  it,  and  the

immense majority of those who use it have had no hand in compiling it. This

kind of socialized potential knowledge is only rendered possible by language,

in fact by written language. All that the user of the telephone needs to know is

a  simple  prescription  for  deriving  appropriate  action  from  the  appropriate

entry in the book. By such devices we diminish enormously the amount of

knowledge that it is necessary to carry in our heads.

  All generalized knowledge is of this sort. Suppose the geography book tells

me that Semipalatinsk is a province and city of Central Asia, in the territory

of  the  U.S.S.R.  This  knowledge  will  remain  purely  verbal  unless  I  haveoccasion to go to Semipalatinsk, but if this should happen there are rules by

which the words of the book show me how to produce desired experiences. In

such a case I may be said to understand the words if I know what action they

prescribe when I have desires connected with what the words mean, or, in an

extreme case, merely a desire to know what the words mean. You may feel a

longing to see the Altai Mountains, knowing nothing about them except that

that is their name. In that case, the guide book shows you what you must do

in order to know the proposition: “These are the Altai Mountains.” When you

have learnt arithmetic you can deal with all the innumerable occasions on

which you have to count your change in shops, but in learning arithmetic you

need not be thinking of its applications. In such ways the province of purely

verbal knowledge becomes wider and wider, and at last it becomes easy to

forget that verbal knowledge must have some relation to sensible experience.

But  except  through  such  relation  we  cannot  define  empirical  truth  and

falsehood, and to forget it is therefore fatal to any hope of a sound philosophy.                                          VI 


                                    Sentences


I WANT in this chapter to consider sentences as opposed to words, and to ask in

what  consists  the  understanding  of  words  that  do  not  denote  objects,  but

occur only as parts of sentences. We saw that the one word “water” may be

used to express what, if fully expressed, requires different sentences. It may

mean “here is water”; it may mean “I want water”; it may, if pronounced with

an interrogative inflexion, mean “is this water?” Obviously such ambiguity is

not desirable, especially in writing, where differences of inflexion are difficult

to indicate. We therefore need such words as “here is”, “I want”, “is this”. It is

the function of such words that forms the theme of this chapter.

  Consider the following sentences: “there is fire here”, “there was fire here”,

“there will be fire here”, “is there fire here?” “I want fire here”, “there is no fire

here”.  These  sentences  are  respectively  present,  past,  future,  interrogative,

optative, and negative, but all deal with the same object, namely fire.

  The word “fire” may be caused in me in various ways. When it is caused

by the sensible presence of fire, I communicate the fact by the sentence “there

is fire here”; when by the memory, by the sentence “there was fire here”. But I

may use this sentence, not to express a memory, but to report what I have

been told, or to state an inference from charred embers. In the former case, the

word “fire” is caused in me by my hearing the word; in the latter case, by my

seeing something which I know to be an effect of fire. Thus when I say “there

was  fire  here”,  my  state  of  mind  may  be  one  of  several  very  different

possibilities.  In  spite  of  these  subjective  differences,  however,  what  I  am

asserting is the same in all the different cases. If my assertion is true, a certain

occurrence took place here, and the occurrence in virtue of which it is true is

the same whether the occurrence is remembered or known through testimony

or inferred from present traces of past combustion. It is for this reason that we

use the same words in these various cases, for a sentence in the indicative is

concerned, not to express a state of mind (though it always does so), but toassert a fact other than that expressed by the sentence. But we will postpone

the explicit consideration of truth and falsehood to a later chapter.

  Similar subjective ambiguities exist in connection with the sentence “there

will  be  fire  here”.  In  a  situation  in  which  you  experience  immediate

expectation of fire, your subjective state is analogous to memory, except in the

vital point of being directed to the future. But as a rule statements about the

future are inferences. You may see a damp haystack fermenting and infer that

it will burn, or you may have been told that at some future date there is to be

a bonfire here. But again these various possibilities make no difference to

what is asserted when you say “there will be fire here”.

  “Is there fire here?” may be a form of imperative, or a suggestion for

investigation. This sentence does not make an assertion, but shows a desire to

be  able  to  make  one.  The  difference  from  “there  is  a  fire  here”  is  not  in

anything having an external reference, but in our attitude to what has such a

reference. We may say that there is an “idea” called “fire-here-now”; when we

preface  these  words  by  “there  is”  we  assert  this  idea,  whereas  when  we

preface them by “is there” we “actively consider” them, i.e. we are concerned

to find out whether or not to assert them. I speak of “outward reference” in a

preliminary way, as the concept is a difficult one, demanding considerable

discussion.

  “I want fire here” is a sentence in the indicative, asserting that I feel a

certain desire, but it is commonly used as if it were an expression of desire,

not  an assertion  of  it.  Strictly  speaking,  desire  ought  to  be  expressed  by

“would there were a fire here” or “Oh for a fire here!” This is more easily and

naturally expressed in a language which, like Greek, has an optative mood.

The sentence “Oh for a fire!” asserts nothing, and is therefore neither true nor

false. It expresses a desire, and a person hearing me pronounce it may infer

that I feel a desire, but it does not assert that I feel a desire. Similarly when I

say “there is a fire here” I express a belief, and the hearer can infer that I have

this belief, but I do not assert that I have a belief.

  When I say “there is not a fire here”, what may be called the “content” is

the same as when I say “there is fire here”, but this content is denied instead

of being asserted.    Reviewing the above sentences, but omitting those referring to past or

future, we find that, considering what they express, they all have the same

core, namely “fire-here-now”. The ideas expressed by “fire”, “here”, and “now”

may be called “indicative” ideas, that is to say, they can all indicate features of

a  sensible  experience.  Taken  all  together,  they  constitute  one  complex

indicative idea. An indicative idea sometimes indicates, and sometimes does

not; if there is a fire here now, “fire-here-now” indicates that fire, but if there

is not a fire, “fire-here-now” indicates nothing. Towards an indicative idea we

may  have  various  attitudes:  assertive,  interrogative,  optative,  or  negative.

These attitudes are expressed by the words “there is”, “is there”, “oh for”, and

“there is not” respectively. (I do not pretend that this list of possible attitudes

is exhaustive.) These attitudes, which are expressed by the above words, can

also be asserted, but we then need indicative words for them; the words are

“belief”, “doubt”, “desire”, “disbelief”. This leads to new sentences, all of which

are assertions, but about my state of mind, not about fire. The sentences are: “I

believe there is a fire here now”, “I wonder if there is a fire here now”, “I hope

there is a fire here now”, and “I disbelieve that there is a fire here now”.

  It is evident that “there-is”, “is-there”, “oh-for”, and “there-is-not” should

each be regarded as one word, and as expressing different attitudes on the part

of the speaker to one and the same idea. It is not their function to indicate

objects, as names do; the fact that the word “not” can be used significantly

does not imply that there is an object called “not” in some Platonic heaven.

For the understanding of language it is essential to realize that, while some

necessary words mean objects, others do not.

  Words  that  mean  objects  may  be  called  “indicative”  words.  I  include

among  such  words  not  only  names,  but  words  denoting  qualities  such  as

“white”, “hard”, “warm”, and words denoting perceptible relations such as

“before”,  “above”,  “in”.  If  the  sole  purpose  of  language  were  to  describe

sensible facts, we could content ourselves with indicative words. But, as we

have seen, such words do not suffice to express doubt, desire, or disbelief.

They also do not suffice to express logical connections, e.g. “if that is so, I’ll

eat my hat”, or “if Wilson had been more tactful, America would have joined

the League of Nations”. Nor do they suffice for sentences needing such wordsas “all” and “some”, “the” and “a”. The significance of words of this kind can

only be explained by explaining the significance of sentences in which they

occur. When you want to explain the word “lion,” you can take your child to

the Zoo and say “look, that’s a lion.” But there is no Zoo where you can show

him if or the or nevertheless, for these are not indicative words. They are

needed in sentences, but only in sentences not concerned exclusively with the

assertion  of  single  facts.  It  is  because  we  need  such  sentences  that  words

which are not indicative are indispensable.                                        VII 


    External Reference of Ideas and Beliefs


THE  kind  of  external  reference  with  which  we  shall  be  concerned  in  this

chapter  is  not  that  by  which  experiences  are  interpreted  as  percepts  of

external objects, as when, for instance, a visual sensation produces in me a

condition  called  “seeing  a  table”.  This  kind  of  external  reference  will  be

considered in connection with the interpretation of physics and the evidence

for its truth. What we are now concerned with is a reference of one part of my

mental life to another, and only derivatively to things not forming part of my

experience.

  We are in the habit of saying that we think of so-and-so and that we

believe in such-and-such. It is the meaning of “of” and “in” in such phrases

that I wish to discuss, as a necessary preliminary to the definition of “truth”

and “falsehood”.

  We considered in an earlier chapter the process of ostensive definition as

the source of the meanings of words. But we then found that a given word

can “mean” an idea as well as a sensible experience; this happens, notably,

when the word is used to express a memory. When the same word can be

used to denote an idea or a sensible experience, that is a sign that the idea is

an idea “of” the sensible experience. But obviously the relation expressed by

this word “of” is one which can exist independently of language, and is, in

fact, presupposed in the use of the same word for an idea and a sensible

experience.

  The relation with which we are concerned is perhaps seen most clearly in

the case of memory. Suppose you have lately seen something horrible—say a

friend run over and killed by a lorry. You will have a constantly recurring

picture  of  the  event  in  your  mind,  not  only  as  pure  imagination,  but  as

something that you know actually occurred. As the dreadful swift sequence

overwhelms  you  once  more,  you  may  say  to  yourself  “yes,  that  really

happened”. But in what sense can this be true? For your recollections are now,and consist of images, not of sensations, still less of actual motor lorries. The

sense in which it is nevertheless true is what we have to elucidate.

  Images  occur  in  two  ways,  as  imagination  and  as  recollection.  I  have

sometimes, under the influence of fatigue or fever, seen the faces of people of

whom I was fond, not with the benign expression to which I was accustomed,

but horribly grimacing and grotesque. These painful images did not command

belief unless my temperature was high enough to cause delirium. Even in

deliberate recollection there are often imaginative accretions which are not

believed, but these do not count as memories. Whatever counts as a memory

consists  of  images  or  words  which  are  felt  as  referring  to  some  earlier

experience. Since it is clear that words can only express memories because a

given word can apply both to an image (or idea) and to a sensible occurrence,

it is clear that we must first consider non-verbal memory, with a view to

discovering what is the relation of an idea to a sensible experience which

leads us to use the same word for both. I shall therefore, for the present,

exclude memories expressed in words, and consider only those that come as

images  accompanied  by  the  belief  or  feeling  that  they  refer  to  a  previous

occurrence.

    Suppose I am asked to describe the furniture of my room. I may go to my

room and record what I see, or I may call up a picture of my room and record

what I see with my mind’s eye. If I am a good visualizer and my room is one

which I have inhabited for some time, the two methods will give results that,

at least in broad outline, will be indistinguishable. It is easy, in this way, to

test the accuracy of my memory. But before it is tested I implicitly believe it.

Some memories are not capable of being tested at all thoroughly, for instance

if you have been the sole spectator of a murder; nevertheless your evidence

will be accepted unless there is reason to suspect you of perjury. At present, it

is not the trustworthiness of memory that concerns us, but the analysis of the

occurrence.

  What is involved in saying that A is an “image” or “idea” of B? First, there

must be resemblance; more particularly, if both are complex, there must be

resemblance of structure. Second, B must play a certain definite part in the

causation of A. Third, A and B must have certain effects in common, forexample, they can cause the same words to occur to a person who experiences

them. When these three relations exist, I shall say that B is the “prototype” of

A.

  But if A is a recollection of B, something more is involved. For in this case

A is felt or believed to be pointing to something other than itself, and this

something is, in fact, B. We should like to say that A is felt to be pointing to B,

but this we have no right to say, since B is not itself present to the person

recollecting; what is present is only A, as B’s representative. We must say,

therefore, that, in memory as opposed to pure imagination, there is the belief:

“A is related to something as idea to prototype”, where the relation of idea to

prototype is defined by the three characteristics mentioned in the preceding

paragraph. I do not mean, of course, that an ordinary memory belief has the

explicit-ness suggested by the above analysis. I mean only that, in memory, an

idea is vaguely felt to point beyond itself, and that the above is an account of

what may be the actual state of affairs when this vague feeling is justifiable.

  When B is the prototype of A, we say that A is an image “of” B. This is a

definition of this use of the word “of”.

  It is obvious that A may be an image of B without the person concerned

being aware of the fact. It is also obvious that A may have many prototypes. If

I tell you I met a negro in an English country lane, the word “negro” may call

up in your mind an image vaguely compounded of many negroes whom you

have seen; in this case they must all count as prototypes of your image. In

general, even when an image has only one prototype, it will usually be vaguer

than its prototype. If, for example, you have an image of a shade of colour,

various shades that you can distinguish when sensibly present might all serve

as  its  prototypes.  This,  incidentally,  supplies  an  answer  to  Hume’s  query:

Could  you  imagine  a  shade  of  colour  you  had  never  seen,  if  it  was

intermediate between two very similar shades that you had seen? The answer

is that you could not form so precise an image, even of a colour that you had

seen, but that you could form a vague image, equally appropriate to the shade

that you had not seen and to the two similar shades that you had seen.

  It will be seen that, according to the above theory, the external reference

of an idea or image consists in a belief, which, when made explicit, may beexpressed in the words: “this has a prototype”. In the absence of such a belief

(which, when it exists, is usually a somewhat vague feeling), although there

may be in fact a prototype there is no external reference. This is the case of

pure imagination.

  In the case of a memory-belief, if what is said to be remembered is an

experience of the person remembering, the above kind of external reference is

the only kind required. But as a rule there is also another kind, namely that

which, at the beginning of this chapter, we declined to consider. Suppose I

remember  “I  saw  an  elephant  yesterday”.  There  is  involved  not  only  my

experience  of  yesterday,  but  belief  in  an  animal  having  an  independent

existence, not only when I saw it, but also before and after. All this depends

upon animal inference in the sense to be considered in Part III, involving a

reference external, not only to my present experience, but to the whole of my

experience.  This  kind  of  external  reference,  however,  takes  us  beyond  the

subject of the present chapter.                                        VIII 


                                      Truth



Elementary Forms


TRUTH and falsehood, in so far as they are public, are attributes of sentences,

either in the indicative or in the subjunctive or conditional. In the present

chapter,  which  will  consider  only  the  simpler  examples  of  truth,  I  shall

confine myself to sentences in the indicative. In addition to sentences there

are some other ways of making public statements, maps, for instance, and

graphs. There are also conventional devices for reducing a sentence to one

essential word, as is done in telephone books and railway time tables. But for

our  purposes  we  may,  without  any  important  loss  of  generality,  confine

ourselves to fully expressed sentences. And until we have considered logical

words, which will be the subject of the next two chapters, we must confine

ourselves to sentences in the indicative.

  But  in  order  to  define  “truth”  and  “falsehood”  we  must  go  behind

sentences to what they “express” and what they “indicate”.

  A sentence has, to begin with, a property which I shall call “signification”.

This is the property which is preserved in an accurate translation. “Two and

two make four” has the same signification as “deux et deux font quatre”.

Signification is also preserved when the wording is changed; e.g. “A is the

husband of B”, “B is the wife of A”, “A is a male who is married to B”, “A is

married to B, who is a female”, all have the same signification. It is obvious

that when two sentences have the same signification both are true or both are

false; therefore whatever distinguishes truth from falsehood is to be sought

rather in the signification of sentences than in sentences themselves.

  Some sentences which, at first sight, appear to be correctly constructed,

are in fact nonsense, in the sense that they have no signification. Such, if

interpreted  literally,  are  “necessity  is  the  mother  of  invention”  and“procrastination is the thief of time”. A very important part of logical syntax

consists of rules for avoiding nonsense in constructing sentences. But for the

present we are concerned with sentences that are too simple to run the risk of

being nonsensical.

  To arrive at what a sentence “signifies”, the easiest way is to ask ourselves

what is in common between a sentence in one language and its translation

into another. Suppose that on a given occasion I say to an Englishman “I am

hot” and to a Frenchman “j’ai chaud”, the two sentences express the same

state of mind and body, and are made true (or false) by the same fact. The

signification of a sentence would thus seem to have two aspects: on the one

hand it “expresses” the condition of the person uttering it, and on the other

hand it points outside this present condition to something in virtue of which it

is true or false. What an asserted sentence expresses is a belief; what makes it

true or false is a fact, which is in general distinct from the belief. Truth and

falsehood are external relations, that is to say, no analysis of a sentence or a

belief will show whether it is true or false. (This does not apply to logic and

mathematics, where truth or falsehood, as the case may be, follows from the

form of the sentence. But I am for the present ignoring logical truth.) Consider

e.g. the sentence “I am an uncle”, and suppose you know that your sister in

India is due to have a child, but you do not know whether the child has yet

been born. No analysis of the sentence or of your state of mind will show

whether the sentence is true or false, since its truth or falsehood depends upon

events in India as to which you are in ignorance. But although understanding

the sentence does not enable you to know whether it is true or false, it does

enable you to know what sort of fact would make it true and what sort would

make it false; this, therefore, is part of the signification of a sentence, or is at

least inseparably connected with the signification, although the actual truth or

falsehood (as the case may be) is not.

  If  “truth”  and  “falsehood”  had  been  defined,  we  could  say  that  two

sentences  are  to  have,  by  definition,  the  same  “signification”  if  whatever

possible state of affairs makes one of them true also makes the other true, and

vice versa. But, as we shall see, it is not clear that “truth” and “falsehood” can

be defined without first defining “signification”.  There  are,  we  said,  two  sides  to  signification,  which  we  may  call

subjective and objective respectively. The subjective side has to do with the

state of the person uttering the sentence, while the objective side has to do

with what would make the sentence true or false. Let us begin by considering

the subjective side.

  When we say that a sentence is true, we mean that a person asserting it

will be speaking truly. A person may pronounce a sentence without intending

to assert it: when an actor says “this is I, Hamlet the Dane”, no one believes

him, but no one accuses him of lying. This shows that the subjective side in

the analysis of signification is essential. When we say that a sentence is “true”,

we mean to say something about the state of mind of a person uttering or

hearing  it  with  belief.  It  is  in  fact  primarily  beliefs  that  are  true  or  false;

sentences only become so through the fact that they can express beliefs. It is

therefore in beliefs that the subjective side of the signification of sentences is

to be sought.

  We may say that two sentences have the same signification if they express

the same belief. But we must, having said this, explain in what sense two

people (or one person at different times) can have the same belief, and by

what tests we can discover when this is the case. For practical purposes we

may say that two people who speak the same language have the same belief if

they accept the same sentence as expressing it; and when two people speak

different  languages,  their  beliefs  are  the  same  if  a  competent  interpreter

regards the sentence in which, one of them expresses his belief as a translation

of that used by the other. But this criterion is not theoretically sufficient, since

infants that cannot speak must be allowed to have beliefs, and so (I should

say) must animals.

    “Belief”, as I wish to use the word, denotes a state of mind or body or

both,  in  which  an  animal  acts  with  reference  to  something  not  sensibly

present. When I go to the station in expectation of finding a train, my action

expresses a belief. So does the action of a dog excited by the smell of fox. So

does that of a bird in a room, which flies against the window panes in the

hope of getting out. Among human beings, the only action by which a belief is

expressed is, very often, the pronouncing of appropriate words.  It will be seen that, according to the above definition of “belief”, it is

closely connected with meaning and with ostensive definition. Words have

“meaning” when there is an association or a conditioned reflex connecting

them  with  something  other  than  themselves—this,  at  least,  applies  to

indicative words. I say “look, there’s a fox”, and you act as you would do if

you smelt a fox. I say “fox” when I see a fox, because a fox suggests the word

“fox” as well as vice versa. When, the fox having just disappeared, I utter the

word “fox”, and when you, having not yet seen the animal, hear the word,

there  is  “belief”  in  the  sense  defined  above.  So  there  is  when,  without

speaking, you look for the fox. But it is only when action is suspended that

belief  becomes  a  definite  state  of  mind—for  instance  when  you  have  just

looked up a train that you mean to take to-morrow. When immediate action is

called for, energy may be drained into the muscles, and “belief” may be shown

as merely a characteristic of bodily movements. But it must be remembered

that shouting “fox” or “tally-ho” is a bodily movement; we cannot therefore

deny that bodily movements may express beliefs.

    External reference, which we discussed in the last chapter, exists in all

indicative words when used in the way in which the use of words begins. It

exists also in non-verbal behaviour, as when a dog scratches at a rabbit-hole

because he has seen a rabbit go down the hole. But when behaviour is non-

verbal it is difficult for the observer, and often for the agent, to say what,

exactly,  it  is  that  the  behaviour  refers  to.  Words,  like  balances  and

thermometers, are instruments of precision, though often not very good ones;

but that to which they give precision can exist, and be apprehended vaguely,

without their help.

  To put the matter schematically, with a more or less unreal simplification:

the presence of a stimulus A causes a certain kind of behaviour, say B; as a

result of experience, something else, say C, may cause B in the absence of A.

In that case, C may be said to cause “belief” in A, and “belief” in A may be

said to be a feature of the behaviour B. When words come in, all this becomes

more precise. The sight of a fox (A) causes you to pronounce the word “fox”

(B); you may learn the trail of a fox in snow (C), and, seeing it, say “fox”. You

are then “believing” A because of C. And if the trail was made by a fox, yourbelief is true.

  That which has external reference—the belief or idea or bodily movement

—is in some cases public and in others private. It is public when it consists in

overt behaviour, including speech; it is private when it consists of images or

“thoughts”. (The meaning of “public” and “private” in this connection will be

explained  in Part  III.)  When  an  occurrence  in  an  organism  has  external

reference, the only feature always present is the causal one explained in the

last paragraph, namely that the occurrence has some of the effects that would

result from the sensible presence of that which is its external reference. We

will give the name “representational occurrence” to anything that happens in

an organism and has external reference.

  In  addition  to  the  essential  causal  relation  by  which  “representational

occurrence”  is  defined,  further  relations  exist  in  certain  kinds  of  such

occurrences. In a memory image there is resemblance to what is represented

(i.e.  remembered).  In  other  images  there  is  likely  also  to  be  resemblance,

though of a less exact kind. If somebody tells you “your son has been killed by

falling over a precipice”, you are likely to have a very vivid image which will

be  correct  in  some  respects  but  not  in  others.  But  words  (except  when

onomatopoeic) have no resemblance to what they mean, and therefore verbal

beliefs cannot be judged true or false by likeness to, or difference from, what

they assert. Verbal behaviour is only one form of bodily behaviour that is

representational; another form is that of the dog scratching at the rabbit-hole.

We may say quite generally that bodily behaviour, when representational,

need not have any resemblance to that to which it refers.

    Nevertheless, in the case of explicit language, there is often a structural

resemblance between a sentence and what it asserts. Suppose you see a fox eat

a  goose,  and  afterwards  you  say  “the  fox  ate  the  goose”.  The  original

occurrence  was  a  relation  between  a  fox  and  a  goose,  while  the  sentence

creates a relation between the word “fox” and the word “goose”, namely that

the  word  “ate”  comes  between  them.  (Cf.  Wittgenstein’s Tractatus.)  This

possible structural similarity between a sentence and what it asserts has a

certain importance, but not, I think, an importance which is fundamental.

  The above account of what makes a representational occurrence “true” is, Ithink, correct when it is applicable, but there are various extensions which

give “truth” a wider scope.

  Let us begin with memory. You may recollect an event which calls for no

present action, and in that case the above definition of “true” is not applicable.

Your memory, if it is in images, may then be “true” in the sense of being like

the event. And even if no present action is called for, there may be future

situations in which your memory has practical importance, and it may now be

called “true” if it will then fulfil the test.

  But  what  is  of  more  importance  is  what  may  be  called  “derivative”

meaning,  which  is  a  property  of  sentences  whose  several words  have

“primary” meaning. Suppose that, for a given child, the words “cat”, “dog”,

and “hate” have primary meaning, in the sense that they have been learnt by

ostensive definition. Then the sentence “cats hate dogs” has a meaning which

does not have to be learnt by a fresh process of either ostensive or nominal

definition. It is, moreover, a sentence which can never be verified by one

sensible occurrence; in this it differs from “there will be a loud noise in a

moment”. Only in Plato’s heaven could we see THE CAT hating THE DOG.

Here on earth, the facts in virtue of which the sentence is true are many, and

cannot all be experienced at one time. The relation of the sentence to the facts

in virtue of which it is true is derivative from a number of other sentences,

each of the form: “This is a cat and that is a dog, and this hates that.” (I am

taking “hate” as a characteristic of overt behaviour; I am doing this not as a

theory, but for purposes of illustration.) We have here three sentences, (a)

“this is a cat”, (b) “that is a dog”, (c) “this hates that”. Each of these can be

directly caused by the present sensible facts, given that the observer has learnt

English.  A  sufficient  number  of  such  sentences,  or  of  the  corresponding

observations or beliefs, will, in most people, in time cause the sentence “cats

hate dogs”, of which the meaning follows by the laws of syntax from the

meanings of sentences of the forms (a), (b), and (c). It is in this sense that the

meaning of such sentences is “derivative”. For the present, having observed

that the meaning of most sentences is derivative, I wish to confine myself to

sentences of which the meaning is primary.

  Let us consider the sentence “this is a cat”, uttered when a cat is sensiblypresent. Hitherto I have been considering “truth” and “falsehood” as ideas

only applicable to representations of things not sensibly present, and if we

adhered  strictly  to  this  view  our  sentences  (a),  (b),  and  (c),when  uttered,

would be neither true nor false. This way of using the words would, however,

be inconvenient, and I should prefer to say that (a), (b), and (c) are true or

false.

  If,  in  the  presence  of  an  animal,  I  say  “this  is  a  cat”,  what  are  the

possibilities of falsehood? There is, first, deliberate lying: I may be talking to a

blind man, and wish him to think it a cat when it is really a rabbit. We may

exclude this case, on the ground that the words I utter do not express a belief,

and on the further ground that the word “cat” is not caused by what I see, but

by some ulterior motive. Then there is the case where I do not see distinctly,

owing to darkness or bad eyesight, and when some one turns on another light

I say “oh, I see it was not a cat”. In this case what I see must have some

likeness to a cat, and if’ I had said “this is something resembling a cat” I

should have spoken truly. Then there is the case of insufficient knowledge of

the language, leading me to give the name “cat” to what is officially called a

puma.  In  this  case  there  is  only  social  error:  my  language  is  not  correct

English, but in the language that I speak my statement is true. Finally, I may

be suffering from delirium tremens and see a cat where there is nothing, at

least from a public point of view. In the absence of such unusual possibilities,

my statement “this is a cat” will be true.

  When there is a cat, and I say “there is a cat”, what is the relation of what

I say to the actual present quadruped? There is a causal relation: the sight of

the cat causes the word “cat”, but this, as we saw in the case of indistinct

vision, is not enough to insure truth, since something not a cat may cause the

word  “cat”.  When  I  say  “this  is  a  cat”,  I  am  asserting  the  existence  of

something which is not merely a momentary visual experience of my own,

but lives and breathes and mews and purrs and is capable of feline joys and

sorrows. All this is erroneous in the case of delirium tremens. Let us therefore

take  ä  simpler  example,  say  “this  is  blue”.  This  statement  need  not  imply

anything beyond an experience private to me, and is therefore not liable to the

kind of error that afflicts the drunkard. In this case, the only possibility oferror  is  ignorance  of  the  language,  leading  me  to  call  “blue”  what  others

would  call  “violet”.  This  is  social  error,  not  intellectual  error;  what  I  am

believing  is  true,  but  my  words  are  ill  chosen.  In  this  case,  therefore,  the

possibility of genuine falsehood in my statement seems to be at a minimum.

  We may say generally: an indicative word is true when it is caused by

what it means, assuming that the word is used in what may be called the

exclamatory manner, as when people shout “fire!” or “murder!” In developed

speech,  we  usually  drop  this  way  of  using  indicative  words,  and,  instead,

preface the word by “this is”. Thus the statement “this is blue” is true if it is

caused by what “blue” means. This is in fact a tautology. But most words,

such as “cat” and “dog”, mean not only what can be a momentary percept, but

also the habitual concomitants of this kind of percept. If these are only usual

but not invariable concomitants, there may be error in using the word that the

percept causes; this is the case of the victim of delirium tremens, and also of

Isaac when he mistook Jacob for Esau. Most words embody animal inductions

which  are  usually  true,  but  not  always;  this  applies,  more  particularly,  to

names of objects or kinds of objects, such as our friends or the various species

of animals. Whenever such words are employed as a result of a percept there

is, therefore, some possibility of error, though often only a very slight one.

  We may now say, as a definition: A sentence of the form “this is A” is

called “true” when it is caused by what “A” means. We may say further that a

sentence of the form “that was A” or “there will be A” is “true” if “this is A”

was, or in the second case will be, true in the above sense. This covers all

sentences asserting what are, were, or will be, facts of perception, and also

those in which, from a percept, we correctly infer its usual concomitants by

animal inference, in so far, at least, as such concomitants can form part of the

meaning  of  an  indicative  word.  This  covers  all  the  factual  premisses  of

empirical  knowledge.  It  does  not  cover  general  statements,  such  as  “dogs

bark”,  nor  yet  principles  of  inference,  whether  deductive  or  non-

demonstrative. These cannot be adequately considered until we have dealt

with  the  meaning  of  logical  words  such  as  “or”  and  “all”.  The  above,

moreover,  is  only  a  definition  of  “truth”,  not  of  “falsehood”.  “Falsehood”

remains to be dealt with later.  There is one important observation to be made about our definitions of

“meaning” and “truth”, and that is that both depend upon an interpretation of

“cause” which, according to modern physics, might seem to be crude and only

partially applicable to natural processes. If this view is adopted, it follows that

whatever defects belong to this old-fashioned notion of “cause” belong also to

the notions of “meaning” and “truth” as we have interpreted them. I do not

think, however, that this is a very serious objection. Both concepts, on other

grounds,  are  necessarily  somewhat  vague  and  inexact,  and  these  other

grounds do much more to prevent precision than is done by modern physics.

Such  propositions  as  “lightning  causes  thunder”,  “micro-organisms  cause

fevers”, “wounds cause pain”, although they have not the certainty formerly

attributed to them, and even if (what for reasons that will appear later, I do

not believe) “cause” is a rough-and-ready notion belonging to a certain stage

of science, not a fundamental category as used to be thought, nevertheless

express in a convenient form truths about the usual though not invariable

course of nature, and as such are still useful except where, as in quantum

physics, the last refinement of accuracy is sought in spite of its complication

and  its  consequent  uselessness  for  most  purposes  of  prediction.  If  human

behaviour could be calculated by the physicists, we should have no need of

such concepts as “meaning”, “belief”, and “truth”. But in the meantime they

remain  useful,  and  up  to  a  point  they  can  be  freed  from  ambiguity  and

vagueness. Beyond this point it would be useless to attempt to go, if “cause” is

in fact not a fundamental concept of science. But if, as I hold, the concept of

“cause” is indispensable, then the above considerations do not arise, or at any

rate arise only in a modified form.                                          IX 


              Logical Words and Falsehood


IN the preceding Chapter we dealt with the truth of beliefs and sentences in

cases where this depends only upon observation and not upon inference from

previous  knowledge.  In  this  Chapter  we  have  to  begin  the  inquiry  into

sentences of kinds that can be proved or disproved when suitable data derived

from observation are known. Where such sentences are concerned, we no

longer have to consider the relation of beliefs or sentences to something which

is in general neither a belief nor a sentence; we have instead to consider only

syntactical relations between sentences, in virtue of which the indubitable or

probable truth or falsehood of a certain sentence follows from the truth or

falsehood of certain others.

  In  such  inferences  there  are  certain  words,  which  I  shall  call  “logical”

words, of which one or more always occur. These words are of two kinds,

which may be called respectively “conjunctions” and “general words”, though

not quite in the usual grammatical sense. Examples of conjunctions are “not”,

“or”, “and”, “if-then”. Examples of general words are “all” and “some”. (Why

“some” is called a “general” word will appear as we proceed.)

  By the use of conjunctions we can make various simple inferences. If “p” is

true, “not-p” is false; if “p” is false, “not-p” is true. If “p” is true, “p or q” is

true; if “q” is true, “p or q” is true. If “p” is true and “q” is true, “p and q” is

true. And so on. Sentences containing conjunctions I shall call “molecular”

sentences,  the  “p”  and  “q”  which  are  conjoined  being  conceived  as  the

“atoms”. Given the truth or falsehood of a set of propositions, the truth or

falsehood of every molecular proposition constructed out of the set follows by

syntactical rules, and requires no fresh observation of facts. We are, in fact, in

the domain of logic.

  Given that we know about “p”, both what is involved in believing “p” and

what would make “p” true or false, what can we say about “not-p”?

  Given a sentence “p“, we may either believe or disbelieve it. Neither ofthese is the primary use of a sentence; the primary use is to express belief in

something else. If, feeling a drop on my nose, I say “it is raining”, that is what

may be called “primary” assertion, in which I pay no attention to the sentence,

but use it to refer directly to something else, namely the rain. This kind of

assertion has no corresponding negative. But if you say to me “is it raining?”

and I then look out of the window, I may answer “yes” or “no”, and the two

answers are, so to speak, at the same level. In this case I am presented first

with  a  sentence,  and  afterwards,  because  of  the  sentence,  with  a

meteorological fact which enables me to say “yes” or “no”. If I answer “yes”, I

am not saying “it is raining”, but “the sentence ‘it is raining’ is true”; for what

was presented to me by your question was a sentence, not a meteorological

fact. If I answer “no”, I am saying “the sentence ‘it is raining’ is false”. This

suggests that perhaps I could interpret “it is not raining” as meaning “the

sentence ‘it is raining’ is false”.

  There are, however, two difficulties about such a view. The first is that it

will make it very difficult to see what we mean by “false”; the second is that it

makes it almost impossible to understand how a sentence containing the word

“not” can be found true by observation. When, in answer to your question, I

look out of the window, I do not merely not observe that it is raining, for I

could have achieved this without looking out; in some sense I observe that it is

not raining, but what this sense can be is obscure.

  How do I know what I assert when I say “it is not raining”? I may say: “I

saw the whole sky was blue, and I know it does not rain when the sky is

blue”. But how do I know this? Because I have often simultaneously observed

facts which I could assert in the two sentences “the sky is blue” and “it is not

raining”. So I cannot in this way explain how I come to know negative facts.

  In what sense, if any, are there negative facts, as opposed to true sentences

containing the words “not”? Let us put the matter as follows: Imagine a person

who knew everything that can be stated without using the word “not” or

some equivalent; would such a person know the whole course of nature, or

would he not? He would know that a buttercup is yellow, but he would not

know that it is not blue. We may say that the purpose of knowledge is to

describe the world, and that what makes a judgment of perception true (orfalse)  is  in  general  something  that  would  still  be  a  fact  if  there  were  no

judgments in the world. The yellowness of the buttercup may be taken to be

such a fact, and must be mentioned in a complete description of the world.

But would there be the buttercup’s not-blueness if there were no judgments?

And must we, in a complete description of the buttercup, mention all the

colours that it is not?

  Let us consider a case where perception leads us as directly as possible to a

very simple negative judgment. Suppose you take sugar thinking it is salt;

when you taste it you are likely to exclaim “this is not salt”. In such a case

there is a clash between idea and sensation: you have the idea of the taste of

salt, and the sensation of the taste of sugar, and a shock of surprise because

the two are so different. Perception only gives rise to a negative judgment

when the correlative positive judgment had already been made or considered.

When you look for something lost, you say “no, it’s not there”; after a flash of

lightning you may say “I have not heard the thunder”. If you saw an avenue

of beeches with one elm among them, you might say “that’s not a beech”. If

some one says the whole sky is blue, and you descry a cloud on the horizon,

you may say “that is not blue”. All these are very obvious negative judgments

resulting,  fairly  directly,  from  perception.  Yet,  if  I  see  that  a  buttercup  is

yellow, I hardly seem to be adding to my knowledge by remarking that it is

not blue and not red. What, then, is meant, in the way of objective fact, by a

                          1
true negative judgment?

  In all spontaneous negative perceptive judgments the experience which

leads to the judgment is, in its essential core, of one and the same kind. There

is an image or idea of a sensation of a certain sensational class, and there is a

sensation of the same class but different from that of which there was an idea.

I look for blue, and I see red; I expect the taste of salt, and I get the taste of

sugar. Here everything is positive: idea of blue, sensation of red, experience of

difference. When I say “difference” I do not mean mere logical non-identity,

such as exists (e.g.) between a colour and a taste; I mean the sort of difference

that is felt between two colours. This sort of difference is a matter of degree.

We can pass from blue to red by a series of intermediate shades, each of

which  is  subjectively  indistinguishable  from  the  next.  We  can  say  thatbetween two shades of colour there is a “great” difference, which would be

meaningless  if  said  of  a  colour  and  a  taste.  Two  shades  of  colour  have  a

certain kind of incompatibility: when I see blue in a certain direction, I do not

simultaneously  see  red  in  that  direction.  Other  kinds  of  sensation  have  a

similar incompatibility; at any rate this is true of sensations of touch: if I feel a

given part of the body tickled, I do not simultaneously feel it thumped.

  When,  as  a  result  of  perception,  I  say  “this  is  not  blue”,  I  may  be

interpreted as meaning “this is a colour differing from blue”, where “differing”

is the positive relation that might be called “dissimilarity”, not abstract non-

identity. At any rate, it may be taken that this is the fact in virtue of which

my  judgment  is  true.  We  have  to  distinguish  between  what  a  judgment

expresses and what it states, i.e. what makes it true or false. Thus when I say

truly “this is not blue”, there is, on the subjective side, consideration of “this is

blue”, followed by rejection, while on the objective side there is some colour

differing from blue. In this way, so far as colour judgments are concerned, we

escape the need of negative facts as what make negative judgments true.

  But there remains a difficulty, and a very serious one. The above theory

only succeeds in virtue of the incompatibility of different colours, i.e. of the

fact that if I see red in a given direction I do not simultaneously see blue in

that direction. This reintroduces “not”, which we were trying to get rid of. If I

could see both blue and red simultaneously in a given direction, then “this is

red” would not be a ground for “this is not blue”. The impossibility of seeing

two  colours  simultaneously  in  a  given  direction feels  like  a  logical

impossibility, not like an induction from experience; but this is only one of

various hypotheses  that are prima facie possible. Suppose that, in a given

direction from my eye, there were a source of red light, and also a source of

blue light directly behind it; I should then have some colour sensation, which

might not be either red or blue, but would be of some single shade of colour. It

would seem that the different shades of colour are the only sensations of their

kind that are physiologically possible, and that there is nothing analogous to

hearing a chord in music.

  Let us examine the hypothesis that the incompatibility of red and blue is

logical, and ask ourselves whether this helps us in eliminating “not” from theobjective world. We are now supposing it a tautology to say: “if there is red at

a given moment in a given direction in the visual field, there is not blue in

that direction at that time”. More simply, though less accurately, we may state

our supposition as saying: “It is logically impossible that ‘this is red’ and ‘this

is blue’ should both be true of a given ‘this’.” But this supposition, whether

true or false, will not help us. Two positive predicates, as Leibniz pointed out

in proving that God is possible, cannot be logically incompatible. Therefore

our  supposition  requires  us  to  regard  either  “red”  or  “blue”  or  both  as

complex, and one at least must contain a “not” in its definition. For, given two

complex predicates P and Q, they will only be logically incompatible if one of

them contains a constituent A and the other contains a constituent not-A. In

this sense “healthy” and “ill” are incompatible, and so are “alive” and “dead”.

But  there  can  never  be  logical  incompatibility  except  what  is  ultimately

derived from the incompatibility of two propositions p and not-p). Therefore

we cannot eliminate “not” from the objective world if we suppose red and

blue to be logically incompatible.

  Let us examine more carefully the view that the incompatibility of red and

blue  has  a  physiological  source.  That  is  to  say,  we  are  to  suppose  that  a

stimulus  of  a  certain  kind  causes  a  sensation  of  red,  while  a  stimulus  of

another kind causes a sensation of blue. I incline to think this the best theory,

but we then have to explain the incompatibility of the two kinds of stimuli. As

a matter of physics, this incompatibility may be taken to arise from the fact

that each light-quantum has one definite amount of energy, together with the

quantum laws connecting energy and frequency. The difficulty here is that it

is not enough to say of a given light quantum that it has such-and-such an

amount of energy; we must also be able to say that it does not have also some

other amount. This is always regarded as so self-evident that it is never even

stated. In classical physics analogous principles might have had a logical basis,

but in quantum physics the incompatibility seems synthetic.

  Let us make a new start in the endeavour to eliminate negative facts.

Given a single indicative sentence, such as “this is red”, we may have towards

it two attitudes, belief and disbelief. Both are “positive” in the sense that they

are actual states of the organism, which can be described without the word“not”. Each is capable of being “true”, but the “truth” of a disbelief is not quite

the same thing as that of a belief. We considered in a previous Chapter what

is meant by the “truth” of a perceptive belief: “this is red” is “true” if it is

caused  by  something  red.  We  did  not  then  define  what  makes  the

corresponding disbelief “true”. Let us now address ourselves to this question.

  If disbelief in “this is red” is a judgment of perception—which is the case

that we are considering—then “this” must be a colour. It is only in logic or

philosophy that we are concerned to disbelieve in the redness of smells or

sounds, and such disbelief belongs to a later stage than that which has to be

considered in relation to our present problem. I shall therefore assume that

when, as a judgment of perception, we disbelieve “this is red”, we are always

perceiving that it is some other colour. We may therefore say that a disbelief

in “this is red” is “true” when it is caused by something having to red the

relation  of  positive  dissimilarity  which  we  considered  earlier.  (This  is  a

sufficient, not a necessary, condition.)

  We must now interpret the law of contradiction. We must not say “ ‘this is

red’ and ‘this is not red’ cannot both be true”, since we are concerned to

eliminate “not”. We must say “A disbelief in the sentence ‘the belief that this

is red and the disbelief that this is red are both true’ is always true”. It seems

that in this way we can replace “not” and “falsehood” by “disbelief” and “the

truth of a disbelief”. We then reintroduce “not” and “falsehood” by definitions:

the words “this is not blue” are defined as expressing disbelief in what is

expressed by the words “this is blue”. In this way the need of “not” as an

indefinable constituent of facts is avoided.

  The above theory may be summarized as follows: As a matter of logic, if

any propositions containing the word “not” are known, there must be, among

uninferred propositions, some that are of the form “not-p“ or of the form “p

implies not-q“. It seems that a judgment “this is not red” may be a judgment

of perception, provided “this” is a colour other than red. The judgment may be

interpreted as disbelief in “this is red”, disbelief being a state just as positive as

belief. A sufficient (not necessary) condition for the truth of disbelief in “this

is red” is that the disbelief should be caused by a “this” having to red the

relation of positive dissimilarity.  There is another sufficient, not necessary, test of truth in certain cases.

“This is blue” is “true” if a person whose belief is expressed by these words

will, in suitable circumstances, have a “quite-so” feeling, and is “false” if he

will get a “how-surprising” feeling. To every belief there is a corresponding

disbelief. A person “disbelieves” what is expressed by “this is blue” if he will

be surprised if “this is blue” is true, and have a “quite-so” feeling if “this is

blue” is false. The words “this is not blue” (to repeat) express disbelief in what

is expressed by “this is blue”. Speaking generally, “not-p” must be defined by

what it expresses.

  The purpose of this theory is to explain how negative sentences can be

true, and can be known, without its being necessary to assume that there are

facts which can only be asserted in sentences containing the word “not”.

  All empirical negative judgments are derived from negative judgments of

perception of the type of “this is not blue”. Suppose you see an animal at a

distance, which at first you take to be a dog, but which, on a nearer approach,

turns out to be a fox. This depends upon perception of shape, and perception

of shape depends upon the fact that where you see one colour you do not see

another. The moment when you say “that is not a dog, but a fox” is the

moment when you see something that you did not expect, say the fox’s brush.

When your surprise is analysed it comes down to some such judgment of

perception  as  “this  is  not  green  but  brown”,  where  the  fox’s  brush

unexpectedly hides the grass.

  There  is  more  to  be  said  about  negation,  in  connection  with  general

propositions,  and  also  with  logic.  But  the  above  analysis  seems  adequate

where negative judgments of perception are concerned, and generally in all

cases in which observation leads us to assert a sentence containing the word

“not”.

  We must now attempt a similar treatment of the word “or”.

  In the case of “or” it is even more obvious than in the case of “not” that

what  makes  “p  or q”  true  is  not  a  fact  containing  some  constituent

corresponding to “or”. Suppose I see an animal and say “that was a stoat or a

weasel”. My statement is true if it was a stoat, and true if it was a weasel;

there is not a third kind of animal, stoat-or-weasel. In fact, my statementexpresses  partial  knowledge  combined  with  hesitation;  the  word  “or”

expresses my hesitation, not something objective.

  But it is possible to raise objections to this view. It may be said that the

word “stoat” denotes a class of animals, not all exactly alike, and that the

same is true of the word “weasel”. The phrase “stoat or weasel”, it may be

said, merely denotes another class of animals, which, like each of the previous

classes, is composed of individuals having common characteristics combined

with  differences.  There  might  easily  be  one  word  for  stoat-or-weasel,  say

“stosel”, and we could then say “that was a stosel”. This would assert, without

“or”, the same fact previously asserted with that word.

  Or,  to  take  a  simpler  instance:  there  are  many  shades  of  blue,  having

different  names;  there  is  navy-blue,  aquamarine,  peacock-blue,  and  so  on.

Suppose we have a set of shades of blue, which we will call b, b, and so on,
                                                                        12

and suppose everything blue is of one of these shades. Then the statement

“this is b or b, or etc.”, is precisely equivalent to “this is blue”, but the first
        12

statement contains “or” while the other does not.

  Such  facts,  however,  rightly  interpreted,  confirm  the  view  that  the

meaning  of  “or”  is  subjective.  The  word  “or”  can  be  eliminated  without

making any difference to the fact that makes a sentence true or false, but not

without making a difference to the state of mind of a person asserting the

sentence. When I say “that is a stoat or a weasel”, I may be supposed to add

“but I don’t know which”; when I say “that is a stosel”, this addition is absent,

though it might still be true if I made it. In fact “or” expresses conscious

partial ignorance, although in logic it is capable of other uses.

  There is in this respect a difference between the standpoint of logic and

that of psychology. In logic, we are only interested in what makes a sentence

true or false; in psychology, we are also interested in the state of mind of the

person uttering the sentence with belief. In logic, “p” implies “p or q”, but in

psychology the state of mind of a person asserting “p” is different from that of

a person asserting “p or q”, unless the person concerned is a logician. Suppose

I am asked “what day was it you went to London?” I may reply “Tuesday or

Wednesday, but I don’t remember which”. If I know that it was Tuesday, I

shall not reply “Tuesday or Wednesday”, in spite of the fact that this answerwould be true. In fact we only employ the word “or” when we are uncertain,

and if we were omniscient we should express our knowledge without the use

of this word—except, indeed, our knowledge as to the state of mind of those

aware of a greater or less degree of ignorance.

  The elimination of disjunctive “facts” is not so difficult as the elimination

of negative “facts”. It is obvious that, although I may believe truly that to-day

is  Tuesday  or  Wednesday,  there  is  not,  in  addition  to  Tuesday  and

Wednesday, another day of the week, called “Tuesday-or-Wednesday”. What I

believe is true because to-day is Tuesday, or because to-day is Wednesday.

Here “or” appears again, and it is true that we cannot define “or”. But what

we cannot define is not a characteristic of the non-cognitive world, but a form

of partial cognition.

    Someone might argue: “When I believe ‘p or q’ I am clearly believing

something, and this something is neither ‘p’ nor ‘q’, therefore there must be

something objective which is what I am believing”. This argument would be

fallacious. We decided that when I am said to be believing “not-p“ I am really

disbelieving “p”; that is to say, there is a sentence not containing the word

“not”, which denotes a certain content that I may believe or disbelieve, but

when  the  word  “not”  is  added  the  sentence  no  longer  expresses  merely  a

content, but also my attitude towards it. The case of “or” is closely analogous.

If I assert “to-day is Tuesday or Wednesday”, there are two sentences, “to-day

is  Tuesday”  and  “to-day  is  Wednesday”,  each  of  which  denotes  a  certain

content. My disjunctive assertion expresses a state of mind in which neither of

these contents is either affirmed or denied, but there is hesitation between the

two. The word “or” makes the sentence one which no longer denotes a single

content, but expresses a state of mind towards two contents.

  When an indicative sentence is asserted, there are three things concerned.

There is the cognitive attitude of the assertor—belief, disbelief and hesitation,

in the cases so far considered; there is the content or contents denoted by the

sentence; and there is the fact or facts in virtue of which the sentence is true

or false, which I will call the “verifier” or “falsifier” of the sentence. In the

sentence  “To-day  is  Tuesday  or  Wednesday”,  the  cognitive  attitude  is

hesitation,  the  contents  are  two,  namely  the  significations  of  “to-day  isTuesday” and “to-day is Wednesday”; the verifier may be the fact that it is

Tuesday or the fact that it is Wednesday, or the falsifier may be that it is a

different day of the week.

  A  sentence  containing  no  logical  words  can  only  express  belief.  If  we

knew all true sentences containing no logical words, and also knew that they

were all, every other true sentence could be obtained by logical inference. A

sentence not in the list would become true by insertion of the word “not”. A

sentence in which two sentences are connected by the word “or” would be

true if either component sentence occurred in the list. A sentence in which

two  sentences  are  connected  by  the  word  “and”  would  be  true  if  both

component  sentences  occurred  in  the  list.  The  same  kind  of  logical  proof

would be possible for sentences containing the logical words “all” and “some”,

as will be shown in the next Chapter.

  Thus if we give the name “atomic sentence” to one not containing logical

words, we should need, as premisses for omniscience (a) a list of all true

atomic sentences, (b)  the  sentence  “all  true  atomic  sentences  occur  in  the

above list”. We could then obtain all other true sentences by logical inference.

  But the above method fails without (b), when we wish to establish the

truth of a sentence containing the word “all” or the falsehood of a sentence

containing the word “some”. We can, no doubt, find substitutes for (b) but

they will all contain, as it does, the word “all”. It seems to follow that our

knowledge  must  embrace  premisses  containing  this  word,  or,  what  is

equivalent, asserting the falsehood of sentences containing the word “some”.

This brings us to the explicit consideration of the words “all” and “some”,

which will be the subject of the next Chapter.1 In what follows I am concerned to show that it is possible to define the truth of negative judgments

    without  assuming  that  there  are  negative  facts.  I  profess  only  to  construct  one  theory  which

    secures this result; I do not contend that there is no alternative theory which might be equally

    satisfactory.                                          X 


                        General Knowledge


BY  “general  knowledge”  I  mean  knowledge  of  the  truth  or  falsehood  of

sentences containing the word “all” or the word “some” or logical equivalents

of these words. The word “some” might be thought to involve less generality

than the word “all”, but this would be a mistake. This appears from the fact

that the negation of a some-sentence is an all-sentence, and vice-versa. The

negation  of  “some  men  are  immortal”  is  “all  men  are  mortal”,  and  the

negation of “all men are mortal” is “some men are immortal”. Thus any person

who disbelieves a some-sentence must believe an all-sentence, and vice versa.

  The  same  element  of  universality  in  a  some-sentence  appears  from  a

consideration of its meaning. Suppose I say “I met a negro in the lane”. My

statement is true if I met any member of the whole class of negroes; thus the

whole class is relevant, just as much as it would be if I said “all negroes are of

African descent”. Suppose you wanted to disprove my statement, there would

be two things you could do. First, you could go through the whole class of

negroes and prove that none of them were in the lane; secondly, you could go

through the class of people I met, and prove that none of them were black. In

either case a complete enumeration of some class is necessary.

  But  as  a  rule  a  class  cannot  be  completely  enumerated.  No  one  can

enumerate the class of negroes. If it is to be possible to enumerate the class of

people I met in the lane, we must be able to know, concerning any member of

the human race, whether or not I met him in the lane. If I know, on a basis of

perception, that I met A, B, and C, and no one else, then I must be supposed to

know the general proposition “all human beings other than A, B, and C were

not  met  by  me”.  This  raises  in  an  acute  form  the  question  of  negative

judgments of perception which we considered in the preceding Chapter. It

also makes it evident that there are difficulties in disproving some-sentences,

and correlatively in proving all-sentences.

  But before considering further the truth or falsehood of such sentences, letus first examine what they signify.

  It is clear that the sentence “all men are mortal” can be understood by a

person who is unable to give a list of all human beings. If you understand the

logical words involved, and also the predicates “man” and “mortal”, you can

fully understand  the  sentence,  whether  or  not  you  can  know  its  truth.

Sometimes you can quite certainly know the truth of such a sentence although

enumeration of the class concerned is impossible; an example is “all primes

other than 2 are odd”. This of course is a tautology; so is the statement “all

widows have been married”, which is not known by means of an enumeration

of widows. In order to understand a general sentence, only intensions need be

understood; the cases in which extensions are known are exceptional.

  Further:  when  an  intension  is  first  given,  enumeration  of  the

corresponding extension is only possible through a universal negative. Given,

e.g. that A, B, C … inhabit a certain village, this only gives the extension of

“inhabitant of this village” if we know “no human being except A, B, C …

inhabits this village”. Thus unless a class is defined by enumeration, it can

only be enumerated by the help of some negative all-sentence which must be

supposed known.

  Although, in pure logic, an all-proposition cannot be proved except by

means  of  premisses  which  are  all-propositions,  there  are  many  all-

propositions which we all believe for reasons derived from observation. Such

are  “dogs  bark”,  “men  are  mortal”,  “copper  conducts  electricity”.  The

conventional  view  is  that  such  propositions  are  inductive  generalizations,

which are probable, but not certain, when their premisses are known. We are

supposed to know from observation “A is a dog and A barks”, “B is a dog and

B barks”, and so on; we are also supposed not to know any proposition of the

form “X is a dog and X does not bark”. It is supposed to follow that probably

all dogs bark. I am not concerned at the moment with the validity of such

inferences,  but  only  with  the  fact  that  knowledge  of  the  principle

guaranteeing their validity, if it exists, is general knowledge, and of a sort

which cannot be based on observation. Induction, therefore, even if valid, does

not help us to understand how we come by general knowledge.

  There  are  three  chief  methods  of  arriving  at  general  propositions.Sometimes they are tautologies, such as “all widows are female”; sometimes

they  result  from  induction;  sometimes they  are  proved  by  complete

enumeration,  e.g.  “everybody  in  this  room  is  male”.  I  shall  begin  by

considering complete enumeration.

  From the point of view of knowledge, though not of logic, there is an

important  difference  between  positive  and  negative  general  propositions,

namely  that  some  general  negative  propositions  seem  to  result  from

observation  as  directly  as  “this  is  not  blue”,  which  we  considered  in  the

preceding Chapter. In Through the Looking-Glass the king says to Alice “who

do you see coming along the road?”, and she replies “I see nobody coming”, to

which the king retorts: “What good eyes you must have! It’s as much as I can

do to see somebody by this light”. The point, for us, is that “I see nobody” is

not equivalent to “I do not see somebody”. The latter statement is true if my

eyes are shut, and affords no evidence that there is not somebody; but when I

say “I see nobody”, I mean “I see, but I do not see somebody”, which is prima

facie evidence that there is not somebody. Such negative judgments are just as

important as positive judgments in building up our empirical knowledge.

  Consider,  for  example,  such  a  statement  as  “this  village  has  623

inhabitants”. Census officials make such statements confidently on a basis of

enumeration. But enumeration involves not only 623 propositions of the form

“this is a human being”, but also an indefinite number of propositions of the

form “this is not a human being”, and finally some assurance that I have

enough such propositions to be fairly sure that no one has been overlooked.

Jenghiz Khan believed the proposition “all the inhabitants of Merv have been

killed”, but he was wrong, because some had crept into hiding-places that he

overlooked. This was an actual source of error; another possible source would

have been if some grotesque and long-immured prisoner had been wrongly

judged by him to be a gorilla.

    Suppose you are a Gestapo officer engaged in a search, and you satisfy

yourself that at a certain time a certain house contained just five people. What

is involved in arriving at this knowledge? Whenever you perceive a human

being in any part of the house, you cause him to come to a certain room;

when you are satisfied that none are left, you count those whom you can see,and find that there are five of them. This requires that, in the first place, you

should have a number of judgments “I see a man in this direction” and “I see

in that direction something which is not a man”. It requires in the second

place the judgment “in the process that I went through, any man in the house

would  have  been  perceived”.  This  second  judgment  is  very  likely  to  be

mistaken  for  common-sense  reasons,  and  we  may  ignore  it,  but  the  other

requires examination.

  When you answer “no” to such questions as “is there a man there?” “do

you hear a noise?” “does that hurt?” you are asserting a universal negative,

and yet your answer seems to result as directly from perception as if you had

answered “yes”. This must depend upon the kind of incompatibility discussed

in the previous Chapter. You are seeing something, but its shape differs from

that of a human being; your auditory consciousness is in the state of listening,

but  not  of  hearing;  in  the  part  of  the  body  concerned  you  are  feeling

something  other  than  pain.  It  is  only  in  virtue  of  incompatibility  that  a

positive percept gives rise to a universal negative: where I see blue, I can

assert that I see no shade of red, provided the area involved is sufficiently

small. Such universal negatives based on perception raise great difficulties, but

without  them  most  of  our  empirical  knowledge  would  be  impossible,

including, as we have seen, everything statistical and everything arrived at by

enumerating  the  members  of  a  class  defined  by  intension,  such  as  “the

inhabitants  of  this  village”  or  “the  people  now  in  this  room”.  We  must

therefore  somehow  find  a  place  in  our  theory  of  knowledge  for  universal

negatives based on perception.

  I  will,  however,  for  the  moment,  leave  this  problem  aside  to  examine

whether there are general facts, as opposed to true general propositions; and,

if general facts are rejected, what it is that makes general propositions true,

when they are true. If this question has been decided, it may become easier to

discover how true general propositions come to be known.

  Are there general facts? We may re-state this question in the following

form: Suppose I knew the truth or falsehood of every sentence not containing

the word “all” or the word “some” or an equivalent of either of these words;

what,  then,  should  I  not  know?  Would  what  I  should  not  know  be  onlysomething about my knowledge and belief, or would it be something that

involves no reference to knowledge or belief? I am supposing that I can say

“Brown is here”, “Jones is here”, “Robinson is here”, but not “some men are

here”, still less “exactly three men are here” or “every man here is called

‘Brown’ or ‘Jones’ or ‘Robinson’”. And I am supposing that, though I know

the truth or falsehood of every sentence of a certain sort, I do not know that

my knowledge has this completeness. If I knew my list to be complete I could

infer that there are three men here, but, as it is, I do not know that there are

no others.

  Let us try to make clear exactly what is involved. When the Antarctic

Continent was discovered, something became known which had been there

before anybody knew it; the knowing was a relation between a percipient and

something  which  was  independent  of  perception  and  generally  of  the

existence of life. Is there anything analogous in the case of true all-sentences

and some-sentences, e.g. “there are volcanoes in the Antarctic”?

  Let us give the name “first-order omniscience” to knowledge of the truth

or falsehood of every sentence not containing general words. “Limited first-

order  omniscience”  will  mean  similar  complete  knowledge  concerning  all

sentences of a certain form, say the form “x is human”. We are to inquire

what is not known to a person with first-order omniscience.

  Can we say that the only thing he does not know is that his knowledge

has first-order completeness? If so, this is a fact about his knowledge, not

about  facts  independent  of  knowledge.  It  might  be  said  that  he  knows

everything except that there is nothing more to know; it would seem that no

fact independent of knowing is unknown to him.

  Let us take a case of limited first-order omniscience. Consider sentences of

the form “x is human” and “x is mortal”, and let us suppose that a certain wise

man knows whether these sentences are true or false, for every value of “x”

for which the sentences are significant, but does not know (what is in fact

true)  that  there  are  no  other  values  of  “x”  for  which  the  sentences  are

significant. Suppose A, B, C … Z are the values of “x” for which “x is human”

is true, and suppose that for each of these values “x is mortal” is true. Then the

statements “A is mortal”, “B is mortal” … “Z is mortal”, taken together, are infact equivalent to “all men are mortal”, that is to say, if one is true so is the

other, and vice versa. But our wise man cannot know this equivalence. In any

case, the equivalence involves the conjunction of “A is mortal”, “B is mortal”

… “Z is mortal”, that is to say, it involves a sentence built up by repeated use

of the word “and”, which is to be interpreted on the same lines as the word

“or”.

  The relation of “and” and “or” is peculiar. When I assert “p and q”, I can be

regarded as asserting “p” and asserting “q”, so that the “and” of “p and q”

seems unnecessary. But if I deny “p and q”, I am asserting “not-p or not-q”, so

that  “or”  seems  necessary  for  interpreting  the falsehood  of  a  conjunction.

Conversely, when I deny “p or q”, I am asserting “not-p and not-q”, so that

conjunction is needed to interpret the falsehood of disjunction. Thus “and”

and “or” are interdependent; either can be defined in terms of the other plus

“not”. In fact, “and”, “or” and “not” can all be defined in terms of “not-p or

not-q”, and also in terms of “not-p and not-q”.

  It is obvious that all-sentences are analogous to conjunctions, and some-

sentences to disjunctions.

  Continuing  with  “all  men  are  mortal”,  let  us  allow  our  wise  man  to

understand “and” and “or” and “not”, but let us still suppose him incapable of

“some” and “all”. Let us further suppose, as before, that A, B, C … Z are all the

men there are, and that our wise man knows “A is mortal and B is mortal and

… and Z is mortal”; but since he does not know the word “all”, he does not

know “A, B, C … Z are all the men there are”. Let us call this proposition “P”.

The question that concerns us is: what, precisely, does he not know in not

knowing P?

  In mathematical logic, P is interpreted as: “Whatever x may be, either x is

not human or x is A or x is B or … x is Z”. Or it may be interpreted as:

“Whatever x may be, the conjunction ‘x is human and x is not A and x is not

B and … x is not Z’ is false.” Either of these is a statement about everything in

the universe, and it seems preposterous to suppose that we can know about all

the things in the universe. In the case of “all men” there is real doubt, since

there may be men on a planet of some other star. But how about “all the men

in this room”?  We will now suppose that A, B, C are all the men in this room, that I

know  “A  is  in  the  room”,  “B  is  in  the  room”,  “C  is  in  the  room”,  that  I

understand “and” and “or” and “not”, but not “all” or “some”, so that I cannot

know  “A  and  B  and  C  are  all  the  men  in  this  room”.  We  will  call  this

proposition “Q”. What do I not know in not knowing Q?

    Mathematical  logic  still  brings  in  everything  in  the  universe in

interpreting Q, which it enunciates in the form: “Whatever x may be, either x

is not in the room or x is not human or x is A or x is B or x is C”; or

“Whatever x may be, if x is not A and x is not B and x is not C, then x is not

human or x is not in the room”. But in this case the logistical interpretation,

however  convenient  technically,  seems  obviously  preposterous

psychologically, for in order to know who is in the room I obviously need not

know  anything  about  what  is  outside  the  room.  How,  then,  is  Q  to  be

interpreted?

  In practice, if I have seen A and B and C, and wish to be sure of Q, I look

in cupboards, under tables, and behind curtains, and from time to time I say

“there is no one in this part of the room”. Theoretically, I could divide the

volume of the room into a number of smaller volumes, each just large enough

to contain a small human being; I could examine each volume, and say “no

one here” except where I found A and B and C. In the end, we must be able to

say  “I  have  examined  all  parts  of  this  room”  if  we  are  to  be  justified  in

asserting Q.

  The statement “no one here” is analogous to “this is not blue”, which we

considered  in  the  preceding  Chapter.  It  is not  an  indefinitely  extended

conjunction: “Brown is not here and Jones is not here and Robinson is not

here and …”, through a catalogue of the human race. What it does is to deny a

character which is common to places where there are human beings, and

which we assert when we say “some one is here”, say in playing hide-and-

seek. This raises no new problem. The universal is now in “I have examined

all parts of the room” or some equivalent.

  The universal that we require may be stated as follows: “If I go through a

certain process, every person in the room will become perceptible at some

stage of the process.” The process must be one that can be actually carried out;we should never be justified in saying “there are just three uranium atoms in

this  room”,  but  human  beings,  fortunately,  are  never  microscopic.  Our

universal may be put in the form: “If I perform a certain series of acts A1, A2,

… An, every human being within a certain volume V will be perceived during

at  least  one  of  these  acts.”  This  involves  an  almost  inextricable  tangle  of

logical,  physical,  metaphysical,  and  psychological  elements,  and  as  we  are

concerned at the moment only with the logical elements it will be better to

choose another example to begin with.

  Let us take: “I have just heard six pips on the wireless.” This may be

interpreted as: “During a brief recent period of time, I had exactly six closely

similar  auditory  sensations  of  a  certain  well-defined  sort,  namely  the  sort

called ‘pips’.” I may give proper names to each of these, say P1, P2. … P6. Then I

say: “P1, and P2 and … and P6 were all the pips I heard in the period from the

time t to the time t.” We will call this statement “R”.
    12

  It is fairly obvious that what distinguishes R from the conjunction “I heard

P1 and I heard P2 and … and I heard P6“ is negative: it is the knowledge that I

heard no other pips. Let us consider this. Suppose I agree to listen for pips

throughout a period of five seconds, at the beginning and end of which you

say “now”. Immediately afterwards, you say “did you hear any pips”? and I

say “no”. This, though logically a universal, may be psychologically a single

negative judgment of perception, like “I don’t see any blue sky” or “I don’t feel

any rain”. In such judgments (to repeat) we have the suggested idea of a

quality and the sensation of a different quality which causes us to disbelieve

the suggested idea. There is here no multiplicity of instances, but a specious

present in which one quality is present and another is felt to be absent. We

know “I did not hear pippiness” and we translate this into “I heard no pips”.

The plurality of “pips” is that of events as opposed to qualities—a subject

considered above in connection with proper names.

  We  can  extend  such  negative  judgments  beyond  the  specious  present,

because  there  is  no  sharp  boundary  between  sensation  and  immediate

memory, or between immediate memory and true memory. You say “do you

hear a pip”, and I reply, not by a sharp “no”, but by a long-drawn out “no-o-o-

o”. In this way my negation can apply to a period of ten seconds or so. Byimmediate memory and true memory it can have its temporal scope extended

indefinitely, so as to justify such a statement as “I watched all night without

seeing a single aeroplane”. When such statements are legitimate, we can say

“between the time t and the time t I saw exactly six planes”, because we can
                      12

divide the period into smaller ones, in six of which we say “I saw a plane”,

and in the others we say “I saw no plane”. These various judgments are then

assembled  in  memory,  and  give  rise  to  the  enumerative  judgment  “in  the

whole period I saw just six planes”.

  If the above theory is correct, negative judgments of perception are not

themselves universal: they say (e.g.) “I did not hear pippiness”, not “I heard no

pips”. The judgment “I heard no pips” follows logically, for a pip is a complex

of which pippiness is a constituent. The inference is like that from “I saw no

one” to “I saw no processions”. A procession is a crowd of human beings, and

one  man  may  at  different  times  form  part  of  many  processions,  but

processions  cannot  exist  without  human  beings.  We  can,  therefore,  from

absence  of  the  quality  called  “humanity”,  logically  infer  the  absence  of

processions. In like manner, from absence of noisiness we can infer absence of

noises.

  If the above theory is correct, enumerative empirical judgments depend

upon  universal  negative  judgments  logically  inferable  from  negative

perceptive judgments concerned with single qualities, such as “I do not see

blue”.  Our  problem,  so  far  as  such  judgments  are  concerned,  is  therefore

solved by the preceding theories as to “not” and as to proper names.

  The above, however, is only one of the ways in which we arrive at general

propositions. It is the way that is appropriate when complete enumeration is

possible, i.e. when there is some property P of which we can say: “a, a, … a
                                                                                12n

are  all  the  subjects  of  which  P  can  be  truly  asserted”.  It  is  applicable  in

arriving at “this village has 323 inhabitants”, or “all the inhabitants of this

village are called Jones” or “all mathematical logicians whose names begin

with Q live in the United States”. What we have been discussing is: “what is

involved in the possibility of complete enumeration”? But there are multitudes

of  general  propositions  in  which  we  all  believe  although  complete

enumeration is either practically or theoretically impossible. These are of twokinds, tautologies and inductions. Of the former kind are “all pentagons are

polygons”, “all widows have had husbands”, etc. Of the latter kind are “all

men are mortal”, “all copper conducts electricity”, etc. Something must be said

about each of these kinds.

    Tautologies are primarily relations between properties, not between the

things  that  have  the  properties.  Pentagonality  is  a  property  of  which

polygonality  is  a  constituent;  it  may  be  defined  as  polygonality  plus

quintuplicity.  Thus  whoever  asserts  pentagonality  necessarily  asserts

polygonality  at  the  same  time.  Similarly  “x  is  a  widow”  means  “x  had  a

husband who is dead”, and therefore asserts, incidentally, “x had a husband”.

We  have  seen  that  an  element  of  tautology  comes  in  when  we  seek  to

interpret such judgments as “I have heard no pips”. The strictly empirical

element is “I have not heard pippiness”; “pips” are defined as “complexes of

which pippiness is a constituent”. The inference from “not pippiness” to “no

pips”  is  thus  tautological.  I  shall  say  no  more  about  tautological  general

propositions,  since  the  subject  belongs  to  logic,  with  which  we  are  not

concerned.

  It  remains  to  consider  inductive  generalizations—not  their  justification,

but their significance, and what facts are necessary if they are to be true.

  That all men are mortal could, theoretically, be proved by the enumerative

method:  some  world-governing  Caligula,  having  made  a  complete  census,

might extirpate his subjects and then commit suicide, exclaiming with his last

breath: “Now I know that all men are mortal”. But in the meantime we have to

rely upon less conclusive evidence. The most important question is whether

such generalizations, when not proved by complete enumeration, are to be

regarded as asserting a relation of intensions, whether certain or probable, or

only  a  relation  of  extensions.  And  further:  where  there  is  a  relation  of

intensions such as to justify “all A is B”, must this be a logical relation making

the  generalization  tautological,  or  is  there  an  extra-logical  relation  of

intensions, of which we acquire probable knowledge by induction?

  Take  “copper  conducts  electricity”.  This  generalization  was  arrived  at

inductively, and the induction consisted of two parts. On the one hand, there

were experiments with different bits of copper; on the other hand, there wereexperiments with a variety of substances, showing that, in every case that had

been  tested,  each  element  has  a  characteristic  behaviour  as  regards  the

conduction  of  electricity.  The  same  two  stages  exist  in  establishing  the

induction “dogs bark”. On the one hand, we hear a number of dogs barking;

on the other hand, we observe that each species of animal, if it makes a noise

at all, makes a noise characteristic of the species. But there is a further stage.

The copper atom has been found to have a certain structure, and from this

structure,  together  with  the  general  laws  of  physics,  the  conduction  of

electricity can be inferred. If we now define copper as “what has a certain

atomic structure”, there is a relation between the intension “copper” and the

intension “conductivity”, which becomes logical if the laws of physics are

assumed. There is now, however, a concealed induction, namely that what

appears as copper by the tests that were applied before the modern theory of

atomic structure is also copper by the new definition. (This need only be true

in  general,  not  universally.)  This  induction  itself  could,  theoretically,  be

replaced  by  deductions  from  the  laws  of  physics.  The  laws  of  physics

themselves are partly tautologies, but in their most important parts they are

hypotheses that are found to explain great numbers of subordinate inductions.

  The same sort of thing may be said about “dogs bark”. From the anatomy

of a dog’s throat, as from that of any musical wind instrument, it should be

possible to infer that only certain sorts of sounds can issue from it. We thus

replace the rather narrow inductive evidence derived from listening to dogs

by the much wider evidence upon which the theory of sound depends.

  In all such cases the principle is the same. It is this: Given a mass of

phenomena, everything about them except an initial space-time distribution

follows tautologically from a small number of general principles, which we

therefore take to be true.

  We are concerned at present, not with the validity of the grounds for these

general principles, but with the character of what they assert, i.e. whether

they  assert  relations  of  intension  or  purely  extensional  relations  of  class-

inclusion. I think we must decide in favour of the former interpretation. When

an induction seems plausible, that is because a relation between the intensions

involved strikes us as not unlikely. “Logicians whose names begin with Q livein the United States” may be proved by complete enumeration, but will not be

believed  on  inductive  grounds,  because  we  can  see  no  reason  why  a

Frenchman named (say) Quételet should abandon his native country as soon

as he became interested in logic. On the other hand, “dogs bark” is readily

accepted on inductive grounds, because we expect a possible answer to the

question “what sort of noise do dogs make?” What induction does, in suitable

cases, is to make a relation of intensions probable. It may do this even in cases

where  the  general  principle  suggested  by  induction  turns  out  to  be  a

                                              222
tautology. You may notice that 1 + 3 = 2, 1 + 3 + 5 = 3, 1 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 4, and

                                                                                          2
be led to conjecture that the sum of the first n odd numbers is always n;

when you have framed this hypothesis, it is easy to prove it deductively. How

far ordinary scientific inductions, such as “copper conducts electricity”, can be

reduced to tautologies, is a very difficult question, and a very ambiguous one.

There are various possible definitions of “copper”, and the answer may depend

upon  which  of  these  definitions  we  adopt.  I  do  not  think,  however,  that

relations between intensions, such as justify statements of the form “all A is

B”, can always be reduced to tautologies. I am inclined to believe that there

are such intensional relations that are only discoverable empirically, and that

are not, either practically or theoretically, capable of logical demonstration.

  It is necessary, before leaving this subject, to say something about some-

propositions,  or  existence-propositions  as  they  are  called  in  logic.  The

statement “some A is B” is the negation of “all A is not B” (i.e. “no A is B”),

and “all A is B” is the negation of “some A is not B”. Thus the truth of some-

sentences  is  equivalent  to  the  falsehood  of  related  all-sentences,  and  vice

versa. We have considered the truth of all-sentences, and what we have said

applies to the falsehood of some-sentences. Now we wish to consider the truth

of some-sentences, which involves the falsehood of correlative all-sentences.

    Suppose I met Mr. Jones, and I say to you “I met a man”. This is a some-

sentence: it asserts that, for some value of x, “I met x and x is human” is true. I

know that the x in question is Mr. Jones, but you do not. What I know enables

me to infer the truth of “I met a man”. There is here a distinction of some

importance. If I know that the sentences “I met Jones” and “Jones is a man”

are true, it is a substantial inference that the sentence “I met a man” is true.But if I know that I met Jones, and also that Jones is a man, then I am already

knowing that I met a man. To know that the sentence “I met Jones” is true is

not the same thing as to know that I met Jones. I can know the latter, but not

the former, if I do not know English; I can know the former, but not the latter,

if I hear it pronounced by a person for whose moral character I have the

highest respect, but again I know no English.

    Suppose you hear the door-bell, and you infer that there is a caller. While

you do not know who it is, you are in a certain state of mind, in which belief

and uncertainty are combined. When you find out who it is, the element of

uncertainty disappears, but the element of belief remains, together with the

new belief “it is Jones”. Thus the inference from “a has the property P” to

“something has the property P” consists merely in isolating and attending to a

portion of the total belief expressed in asserting “a has the property P”. I think

something of the same sort may be said about all deductive inference, and that

the difficulty of such inference, when it exists, is due to the fact that we are

believing that a sentence is true rather than what the sentence asserts.

  The  transition  from  sentences  expressing  judgments  of  perception  to

some-sentences, e.g. from “there’s Jones” to “there’s somebody”, thus offers no

difficulty. But there are a number of some-sentences in which we all believe,

but  which  are  not  arrived  at  in  this  simple  way.  We  often  know  that

something has the property P, although there is no definite thing a of which

we can say “a has the property P”. We know, for instance, that some one was

Mr. Jones’s father, but we may be unable to say who he was. No one knows

who was Napoleon III’s father, but we all believe that some one was. If a

bullet whizzes past you when no one is in sight, you say “some one fired at

me”. As a rule, in such cases, you are making an inference from a general

proposition. Everyone has a father, therefore Mr. Jones has a father. If you

believe that everything has a cause, many things will be only known to you as

“the something that caused this”. Whether such generalizations are the only

source of some-sentences not directly derived from perception, or whether, on

the  contrary,  there  must  be  some-sentences  among  the  premisses  of  our

knowledge, is a question which, for the present, I will leave open.

  There is a school, of which Brouwer is the founder, which holds that asome-sentence may be neither true nor false. The stock example is “there are

three consecutive 7’s in the decimal expression of π”. So far as this has been

worked out, no three consecutive 7’s have occurred. If they occur at a later

point, this may in time be discovered; but if they never occur, this can never

be discovered. I have discussed this question in the “Inquiry into Meaning and

Truth”, where I came to the conclusion that such sentences are always either

true or false if they are syntactically significant. As I see no reason to change

this view, I shall refer the reader to that book for a statement of my grounds,

and I shall assume, without further argument, that all syntactically correct

sentences are either true or false.                                          XI 


        Fact, Belief, Truth, and Knowledge


THE purpose of this chapter is to state in dogmatic form certain conclusions

which follow from previous discussions, together with the fuller discussions of

“An  Inquiry  into  Meaning  and  Truth”.  More  particularly,  I  wish  to  give

meanings, as definite as possible, to the four words in the title of this chapter.

I  do  not  mean  to  deny  that  the  words  are  susceptible  of  other  equally

legitimate meanings, but only that the meanings which I shall assign to them

represent important concepts, which, when understood and distinguished, are

useful in many philosophical problems, but when confused are a source of

inextricable tangles.A. Fact


“Fact”, as I intend the term, can only be defined ostensively. Everything that

there is in the world I call a “fact”. The sun is a fact; Cæsar’s crossing of the

Rubicon was a fact; if I have toothache, my toothache is a fact. If I make a

statement, my making it is a fact, and if it is true there is a further fact in

virtue of which it is true, but not if it is false. The butcher says: “I’m sold out,

and that’s a fact”; immediately afterwards, a favoured customer arrives, and

gets a nice piece of lamb from under the counter. So the butcher told two lies,

one in saying he was sold out, and the other in saying that his being sold out

was a fact. Facts are what make statements true or false. I should like to

confine the word “fact” to the minimum of what must be known in order that

the truth or falsehood of any statement may follow analytically from those

asserting that minimum. For example, if “Brutus was a Roman” and “Cassius

was a Roman” each assert a fact, I should not say that “Brutus and Cassius

were Romans” asserted a new fact. We have seen that the questions whether

there  are  negative  facts  and  general  facts  raise  difficulties.  These  niceties,

however, are largely linguistic.

  I mean by a “fact” something which is there, whether anybody thinks so

or  not.  If  I  look  up  a  railway  time-table  and  find  that  there  is  a  train  to

Edinburgh at 10 a.m., then, if the time-table is correct, there is an actual train,

which is a “fact”. The statement in the time-table is itself a “fact”, whether

true or false, but it only states a fact if it is true, i.e. if there really is a train.

Most facts are independent of our volitions; that is why they are called “hard”,

“stubborn”, or “ineluctable”. Physical facts, for the most part, are independent,

not only of our volitions, but even of our existence.

  The  whole  of  our  cognitive  life  is,  biologically  considered,  part  of  the

process of adaptation to facts. This process is one which exists, in a greater or

less degree, in all forms of life, but is not commonly called “cognitive” until it

reaches  a  certain  level  of  development.  Since  there  is  no  sharp  frontier

anywhere between the lowest animal and the most profound philosopher, it is

evident that we cannot say precisely at what point we pass from mere animalbehaviour  to  something  deserving  to  be  dignified  by  the  name  of  “

knowledge”. But at every stage there is adaptation, and that to which the

animal adapts itself is the environment of fact.B. Belief


“Belief”,  which  we  have  next  to  consider,  has  an  inherent  and  inevitable

vagueness, which is due to the continuity of mental development from the

amoeba to homo sapiens.  In  its  most  developed  form,  which  is  that  most

considered  by  philosophers,  it  is  displayed  by  the  assertion  of  a  sentence.

After sniffing for a time, you exclaim: “Good heavens! the house is on fire.”

Or, when a picnic is in contemplation, you say: “Look at those clouds: there

will be rain.” Or, in a train, you try to subdue an optimistic fellow-passenger

by observing: “Last time I did this journey we were three hours late.” Such

remarks, if you are not lying, express beliefs. We are so accustomed to the use

of words for expressing beliefs that it may seem strange to speak of “belief” in

cases where there are no words. But it is clear that even when words are used

they are not of the essence of the matter. The smell of burning first makes you

believe that the house is on fire, and then the words come, not as being the

belief, but as a way of putting it into a form of behaviour in which it can be

communicated to others. I am thinking, of course, of beliefs that are not very

complicated or refined. I believe that the angles of a polygon add up to twice

as many right angles as the figure has sides diminished by four right angles,

but  a  man  would  need  super-human  mathematical  intuition  to  be  able  to

believe this without words. But the simpler kind of belief, especially when it

calls for action, may be entirely unverbalized. When you are travelling with a

companion, you may say: “We must run; the train is just going to start.” But if

you are alone you may have the same belief, and run just as fast, without any

words passing through your head.

  I  propose,  therefore,  to  treat  belief  as  something  that  can  be  pre-

intellectual, and can be displayed in the behaviour of animals. I incline to

think  that,  on  occasion,  a  purely  bodily  state  may  deserve  to  be  called  a

“belief”. For example, if you walk into your room in the dark, and someone

has put a chair in an unusual place, you may bump into it, because your body

believed there was no chair there. But the parts played by mind and body

respectively  in  belief  are  not  very  important  to  separate  for  our  presentpurposes. A belief, as I understand the term, is a certain kind of state of body

or mind or both. To avoid verbiage, I shall call it a state of an organism, and

ignore the distinction of bodily and mental factors.

  One characteristic of a belief is that it has external reference, in the sense

defined  in  a  previous  chapter.  The  simplest  case,  which  can  be  observed

behaviouristically, is when, owing to a conditioned reflex, the presence of A

causes behaviour appropriate to B. This covers the important case of acting on

information received: here the phrase heard is A, and what it signifies is B.

Somebody says “look out, there’s a car coming”, and you act as you would if

you saw the car. In this case you are believing what is signified by the phrase

“a car is coming”.

  Any  state  of  an  organism  which  consists  in  believing  something  can,

theoretically, be fully described without mentioning the something. When you

believe “a car is coming”, your belief consists in a certain state of the muscles,

sense-organs, and emotions, together perhaps with certain visual images. All

this, and whatever else may go to make up your belief, could, in theory, be

fully described by a psychologist and physiologist working together, without

their ever having to mention anything outside your mind and body. Your

state, when you believe that a car is coming, will be very different in different

circumstances. You may be watching a race, and wondering whether the car

on which you have put your money will win. You may be waiting for the

return of your son from captivity in the Far East. You may be trying to escape

from the police. You may be suddenly roused from absent-mindedness while

crossing the street. But although your total state will not be the same in these

various cases, there will be something in common among them, and it is this

something which makes them all instances of the belief that a car is coming. A

belief, we may say, is a collection of states of an organism bound together by

all having, in whole or part, the same external reference.

  In an animal or a young child, believing is shown by an action or series of

actions. The beliefs of the hound about the fox are shown by his following the

scent. But in human beings, as a result of language and of the practice of

suspended reactions, believing often becomes a more or less static condition,

consisting perhaps in pronouncing or imagining appropriate words, togetherwith one of the feelings that constitute different kinds of belief. As to these,

we  may  enumerate:  first,  the  kind  of  belief  that  consists  in  filling  out

sensations by animal inferences; second, memory; third, expectation; fourth,

the kind of belief generated unreflectingly by testimony; and fifth, the kind of

belief resulting from conscious inference. Perhaps this list is both incomplete

and  in  part  redundant,  but  certainly  perception,  memory,  and  expectation

differ as to the kinds of feeling involved. “Belief”, therefore, is a wide generic

term, and a state of believing is not sharply separated from cognate states

which would not naturally be described as believings.

  The question what it is that is believed when an organism is in a state of

believing is usually somewhat vague. The hound pursuing a scent is unusually

definite, because his purpose is simple and he has no doubt as to the means;

but a pigeon hesitating whether to eat out of your hand is in a much more

vague and complex condition. Where human beings are concerned, language

gives an illusory appearance of precision; a man may be able to express his

belief in a sentence, and it is then supposed that the sentence is what he

believes. But as a rule this is not the case. If you say “look, there is Jones”, you

are believing something, and expressing your belief in words, but what you

are believing has to do with Jones, not with the name “Jones”. You may, on

another occasion, have a belief which is concerned with words. “Who is that

very  distinguished  man  who  has  just  come  in?  That  is  Sir Theophilus

Thwackum.” In this case it is the name you want. But as a rule in ordinary

speech the words are, so to speak, transparent; they are not what is believed,

any more than a man is the name by which he is called.

  When words merely express a belief which is about what the words mean,

the belief indicated by the words is lacking in precision to the degree that the

meaning  of  the  words  is  lacking  in  precision.  Outside  logic  and  pure

mathematics, there are no words of which the meaning is precise, not even

such words as “centimetre” and “second”. Therefore even when a belief is

expressed in words having the greatest degree of precision of which empirical

words are capable, the question as to what it is that is believed is still more or

less vague.

  This vagueness does not cease when a belief is what may be called “purelyverbal”, i.e. when what is believed is that a certain sentence is true. This is the

sort  of  belief  acquired  by  schoolboys  whose  education  has  been  on  old-

fashioned  lines.  Consider  the  difference  in  the  schoolboy’s  attitude  to

“William  the  Conqueror,  1066”  and  “next  Wednesday  will  be  a  whole

holiday”. In the former case, he knows that that is the right form of words,

and cares not a pin for their meaning; in the latter case, he acquires a belief

about next Wednesday, and cares not a pin what words you use to generate

his belief. The former belief, but not the latter, is “purely verbal”.

  If I were to say that the schoolboy is believing that the sentence “William

the Conqueror, 1066” is “true”, I should have to add that his definition of

“truth” is purely pragmatic: a sentence is “true” if the consequences of uttering

it in the presence of a master are pleasant; if they are unpleasant, it is “false”.

    Forgetting  the  schoolboy,  and  resuming  our  proper  character  as

philosophers, what do we mean when we say that a certain sentence is “true”?

I am not yet asking what is meant by “true”; this will be our next topic. For

the moment I am concerned to point out that, however “true” may be defined,

the significance of “this sentence is true” must depend upon the significance of

the sentence, and is therefore vague in exactly the degree in which there is

vagueness in the sentence which is said to be true. We do not therefore escape

from vagueness by concentrating attention on purely verbal beliefs.

    Philosophy, like science, should realize that, while complete precision is

impossible, techniques can be invented which gradually diminish the area of

vagueness or uncertainty. However admirable our measuring apparatus may

be, there will always remain some lengths concerning which we are in doubt

whether they are greater than, less than, or equal to, a metre; but there is no

known limit to the refinements by which the number of such doubtful lengths

can be diminished. Similarly, when a belief is expressed in words, there will

always remain a band of possible circumstances concerning which we cannot

say whether they would make the belief true or false, but the breadth of this

band  can  be  indefinitely  diminished,  partly  by  improved  verbal  analysis,

partly  by  a  more  delicate  technique  in  observation.  Whether  complete

precision is or is not theoretically possible depends upon whether the physical

world is discrete or continuous.  Let us now consider the case of a belief expressed in words all of which

have  the  greatest  attainable  degree  of  precision.  Suppose,  for  the  sake  of

concreteness, that I believe the sentence: “My height is greater than 5 ft. 8 ins.

and less than 5 ft. 9 ins.” Let us call this sentence “S”. I am not yet asking what

would make this sentence true, or what would entitle me to say that I know it;

I am asking only: “What is happening in me when I have the belief which I

express by the sentence S?” There is obviously no one correct answer to this

question. All that can be said definitely is that I am in a state such as, if

certain further things happen, will give me a feeling which might be expressed

by  the  words  “quite  so”,  and  that,  now,  while  these  things  have  not  yet

happened,  I  have  the  idea  of  their  happening  combined  with  the  feeling

expressed by the word “yes”. I may, for instance, imagine myself standing

against a wall on which there is a scale of feet and inches, and in imagination

see the top of my head between two marks on this scale, and towards this

image I may have the feeling of assent. We may take this as the essence of

what may be called “static” belief, as opposed to belief shown by action: static

belief consists in an idea or image combined with a yes-feeling.C. Truth


I come now to the definition of “truth” and “falsehood”. Certain things are

evident. Truth is a property of beliefs, and derivatively of sentences which

express beliefs. Truth consists in a certain relation between a belief and one or

more facts other than the belief. When this relation is absent, the belief is

false. A sentence may be called “true” or “false” even if no one believes it,

provided that, if it were believed, the belief would be true or false as the case

may be.

  So much, I say, is evident. But what is not evident is the nature of the

relation  between  belief  and  fact  that  is  involved,  or  the  definition  of  the

possible fact that will make a given belief true, or the meaning of “possible” in

this  phrase.  Until  these  questions  are  answered  we  have  no  adequate

definition of “truth”.

  Let us begin with the biologically earliest form of belief, which is to be

seen  among  animals  as  among  men.  The  compresence  of  two  kinds  of

circumstance, A and B, if it has been frequent or emotionally interesting, is

apt to have the result that, when A is sensibly present, the animal reacts as it

formerly reacted to B, or at any rate displays some part of this reaction. In

some animals this connection may be sometimes innate, and not the result of

experience.  But  however  the  connection  may  be  brought  about,  when  the

sensible  presence  of  A  causes  acts  appropriate  to  B,  we  may  say  that  the

animal “believes” B to be in the environment, and that the belief is “true” if B

is in the environment. If you wake a man up in the middle of the night and

shout “fire!” he will leap from his bed even if he does not yet see or smell fire.

His action is evidence of a belief which is “true” if there is fire, and “false”

otherwise. Whether his belief is true depends upon a fact which may remain

outside his experience. He may escape so fast that he never acquires sensible

evidence of the fire; he may fear that he will be suspected of incendiarism and

flee  the  country,  without  ever  inquiring  whether  there  was  a  fire  or  not;

nevertheless his belief remains true if there was the fact (namely fire) which

constituted its external reference or significance, and if there was not such afact his belief remained false even if all his friends assured him that there had

been a fire.

  The difference between a true and false belief is like that between a wife

and a spinster: in the case of a true belief there is a fact to which it has a

certain relation, but in the case of a false belief there is no such fact. To

complete our definition of “truth” and “falsehood” we need a description of

the fact which would make a given belief true, this description being one

which applies to nothing if the belief is false. Given a woman of whom we do

not know whether she is married or not, we can frame a description which

will apply to her husband if she has one, and to nothing if she is a spinster.

Such a description would be: “the man who stood beside her in a church or

registry office while certain words were pronounced”. In like manner we want

a description of the fact or facts which, if they exist, make a belief true. Such

fact or facts I call the “verifier” of the belief.

  What is fundamental in this problem is the relation between sensations

and images, or, in Hume’s terminology, between impressions and ideas. We

have considered in a previous chapter the relation of an idea to its prototype,

and  have  seen  how  “meaning”  develops  out  of  this  relation.  But  given

meaning and syntax, we arrive at a new concept, which I call “significance”,

and which is characteristic of sentences and of complex images. In the case of

single words used in an exclamatory manner, such as “fire!” or “murder!”

meaning  and  significance  coalesce,  but  in  general  they  are  distinct.  The

distinction is made evident by the fact that words must have meaning if they

are  to  serve  a  purpose,  but  a  string  of  words  does  not  necessarily  have

significance.  Significance  is  a  characteristic  of  all  sentences  that  are  not

nonsensical, and not only of sentences in the indicative, but also of such as are

interrogative, imperative, or optative. For present purposes, however, we may

confine ourselves to sentences in the indicative. Of these we may say that the

significance consists in the description of the fact which, if it exists, will make

the sentence true. It remains to define this description.

  Let us take an illustration. Jefferson had a belief expressed in the words:

“There are mammoths in North America.” This belief might have been true

even  if  no  one  had  seen  one  of  these  mammoths;  there  might,  when  heexpressed the belief, have been just two in an uninhabited part of the Rocky

Mountains, and they might soon afterwards have been swept by a flood down

the Colorado River into the sea. In that case, in spite of the truth of his belief,

there would have been no evidence for it. The actual mammoths would have

been facts, and would have been, in the above sense, “verifiers” of the belief. A

verifier which is not experienced can often be described, if it has a relation

known by experience to something known by experience; it is in this way that

we  understand  such  a  phrase  as  “the  father  of  Adam”,  which  describes

nothing.  It  is  in  this  way  that  we  understand  Jefferson’s belief  about

mammoths: we know the sort of facts that would have made his belief true,

that  is  to  say,  we  can  be  in  a  state  of  mind  such  that,  if  we  had  seen

mammoths, we should have exclaimed: “Yes, that’s what I was thinking of.”

  The  significance  of  a  sentence  results  from  the  meanings  of  its  words

together with the laws of syntax. Although meanings must be derived from

experience, significance need not. I know from experience the meaning of

“man”  and  the  meaning  of  “wings”,  and  therefore  the  significance  of  the

sentence “There is a winged man”, although I have no experience of what this

sentence signifies. The significance of a sentence may always be understood

as in some sense a description. When this description describes a fact, the

sentence is “true”; otherwise it is “false”.

  It is important not to exaggerate the part played by convention. So long as

we are considering beliefs, not the sentences in which they are expressed,

convention  plays  no  part  at  all.  Suppose  you  are  expecting  to  meet  some

person of whom you are fond, and whom you have not seen for some time.

Your expectation may be quite wordless, even if it is detailed and complex.

You may hope that he will be smiling, you may recall his voice, his gait, the

expression of his eyes; your total expectation may be such as only a good

painter could express, in paint, not in words. In this case you are expecting an

experience of your own, and the truth or falsehood of your expectation is

covered by the relation of idea and impression: your expectation is “true” if

the impression, when it comes, is such that it might have been the prototype

of your previous idea if the time-order had been reversed. This is what we

express  when  we  say:  “That  is  what  I  expected  to  see.”  Convention  isconcerned only in the translation of belief into language, or (if we are told

something) of language into belief. Moreover the correspondence of language

and belief, except in abstract matters, is usually by no means exact: the belief

is richer in detail and context than the sentence, which picks out only certain

salient features. You say “I shall see him soon”, but you think “I shall see him

smiling, but looking older, friendly, but shy, with his hair untidy and his shoes

muddy”—and so on, through an endless variety of detail of which you may be

only half aware.

  The  case  of  an  expectation  is  the  simplest  from  the  point  of  view  of

defining truth and falsehood, for in this case the fact upon which truth or

falsehood depends is about to be experienced. Other cases are more difficult.

    Memory, from the standpoint of our present problem, is closely analogous

to expectation. A recollection is an idea, while the fact recollected was an

impression; the memory is “true” if the recollection has to the fact that kind of

resemblance which exists between an idea and its prototype.

  Consider, next, such a statement as “you have a toothache”. In any belief

concerning another person’s experience there may be the same sort of extra-

verbal richness that we have seen to be frequent in regard to expectations of

our  own  experiences;  you  may,  having  recently  had  toothache,  feel

sympathetically  the  throbbing  pangs  that  you  imagine  your  friend  to  be

suffering. Whatever wealth or paucity of imagination you may bring to bear,

it is clear that your belief is “true” in proportion as it resembles the fact of

your  friend’s  toothache—the  resemblance  being  again  of  the  sort  that  can

subsist between idea and prototype.

  But  when  we  pass  on  to  something  which  no  one  experiences  or  has

experienced, such as the interior of the earth, or the world before life began,

both belief and truth become more abstract than in the above cases. We must

now  consider  what  can  be  meant  by  “truth”  when  the  verifying  fact  is

experienced by no one.

  Anticipating coming discussions, I shall assume that the physical world, as

it is independently of perception, can be known to have a certain structural

similarity to the world of our percepts, but cannot be known to have any

qualitative similarity. And when I say that it has structural similarity, I amassuming that the ordering relations in terms of which the structure is defined

are spatio-temporal relations such as we know in our own experience. Certain

facts about the physical world, therefore—those facts, namely, which consist

of space-time structure—are such as we can imagine. On the other hand, facts

as to the qualitative character of physical occurences are, presumably, such as

we cannot imagine.

  Now while there is no difficulty in supposing that there are unimaginable

facts, there cannot be beliefs, other than general beliefs, of which the verifiers

would be unimaginable. This is an important principle, but if it is not to lead

us astray a little care is necessary as regards certain logical points. The first of

these is that we may know a general proposition although we do not know

any instance of it. On a large pebbly beach you may say, probably with truth:

“There are pebbles on this beach which no one will ever have noticed.” It is

quite certainly true that there are finite integers which no one will ever have

thought  of.  But  it  is  self-contradictory  to  suppose  such  propositions

established by giving instances of their truth. This is only an application of the

principle that we can understand statements about all or some of the members

of a class without being able to enumerate the members. We understand the

statement “all men are mortal” just as completely as we should if we could

give a complete list of men; for to understand this statement we need only

understand the concepts “man” and “mortal” and what is meant by being an

instance of them.

  Now take the statement: “There are facts which I cannot imagine.” I am

not considering whether this statement is true; I am only concerned to show

that it is intelligible. Observe, in the first place, that if it is not intelligible, its

contradictory must also be not intelligible, and therefore not true, though also

not false. Observe, in the second place, that to understand the statement it is

unnecessary to be able to give instances, any more than of the unnoticed

pebbles or the numbers that are not thought of. All that is necessary is to

understand the words and the syntax, which we do. The statement is therefore

intelligible; whether it is true is another matter.

  Take, now, the following statement: “There are electrons, but they cannot

be perceived.” Again I am not asking whether the statement is true, but whatis meant by supposing it true or believing it to be true. “Electron” is a term

defined by means of causal and spatio-temporal relations to events that we

experience, and to other events related to them in ways of which we have

experience. We have experience of the relation “parent”, and can therefore

understand the relation “great-great-great-grandparent”, although we have no

experience  of  this  relation.  In  like  manner  we  can  understand  sentences

containing the word “electron”, in spite of not perceiving anything to which

this word is applicable. And when I say we can understand such sentences, I

mean that we can imagine facts which would make them true.

  The  peculiarity,  in  such  cases,  is  that  we  can  imagine general

circumstances  which  would  verify  our  belief,  but  cannot  imagine the

particular facts which are instances of the general fact. I cannot imagine any

particular fact of the form: “n is a number which will never have been thought

of”, for, whatever value I give to n, my statement becomes false by the very

fact of my giving that value. But I can quite well imagine the general fact

which gives truth to the statement: “There are numbers which will never have

been thought of.” The reason is that general statements are concerned with

intensions,  and  can  be  understood  without  any  knowledge  of  the

corresponding extensions.

  Beliefs as to what is not experienced, as the above discussion has shown,

are not as to unexperienced individuals, but as to classes of which no member

is  experienced.  A  belief  must  always  be  capable  of  being  analysed  into

elements that experience has made intelligible, but when a belief is set out in

logical  form  it  often  suggests  a  different  analysis,  which  would  seem  to

involve components not known by experience. When such psychologically

misleading analysis is avoided, we can say, quite generally: Every belief which

is not merely an impulse to action is in the nature of a picture, combined with

a yes-feeling or a no-feeling; in the case of a yes-feeling it is “true” if there is a

fact having to the picture the kind of similarity that a prototype has to an

image; in the case of a no-feeling it is “true” if there is no such fact. A belief

which is not true is called “false”.

  This is a definition of “truth” and “falsehood”.D. Knowledge


I come now to the definition of “knowledge”. As in the cases of “belief” and

“truth”,  there  is  a  certain  inevitable  vagueness  and  inexactitude  in  the

conception. Failure to realize this has led, it seems to me, to important errors

in the theory of knowledge. Nevertheless, it is well to be as precise as possible

about the unavoidable lack of precision in the definition of which we are in

search.

  It  is  clear  that  knowledge  is  a  sub-class  of  true  beliefs:  every  case  of

knowledge is a case of true belief, but not vice versa. It is very easy to give

examples of true beliefs that are not knowledge. There is the man who looks

at a clock which is not going, though he thinks it is, and who happens to look

at it at the moment when it is right; this man acquires a true belief as to the

time of day, but cannot be said to have knowledge. There is the man who

believes, truly, that the last name of the Prime Minister in 1906 began with a

B, but who believes this because he thinks that Balfour was Prime Minister

then, whereas in fact it was Campbell-Bannerman. There is the lucky optimist

who, having bought a ticket for a lottery, has an unshakeable conviction that

he will win, and, being lucky, does win. Such instances can be multiplied

indefinitely, and show that you cannot claim to have known merely because

you turned out to be right.

  What character in addition to truth must a belief have in order to count as

knowledge?  The  plain  man  would  say  there  must  be  sound  evidence  to

support the belief. As a matter of common sense this is right in most of the

cases in which doubt arises in practice, but if intended as a complete account

of the matter it is very inadequate. “Evidence” consists, on the one hand, of

certain matters of fact that are accepted as indubitable, and, on the other

hand, of certain principles by means of which inferences are drawn from the

matters of fact. It is obvious that this process is unsatisfactory unless we know

the matters of fact and the principles of inference not merely by means of

evidence, for otherwise we become involved in a vicious circle or an endless

regress. We must therefore concentrate our attention on the matters of factand the principles of inference. We may then say that what is known consists,

first, of certain matters of fact and certain principles of inference, neither of

which stands in need of extraneous evidence, and secondly, of all that can be

ascertained  by  applying  the  principles  of  inference  to  the  matters  of  fact.

Traditionally, the matters of fact are those given in perception and memory,

while the principles of inference are those of deductive and inductive logic.

  There  are  various  unsatisfactory  features  in  this  traditional  doctrine,

though I am not at all sure that, in the end, we can substitute anything very

much  better.  In  the  first  place,  the  doctrine  does  not  give  an  intensional

definition of “knowledge”, or at any rate not a purely intensional definition; it

is  not  clear  what  there  is  in  common  between  facts  of  perception  and

principles of inference. In the second place, as we shall see in Part III, it is very

difficult to say what are facts of perception. In the third place, deduction has

turned out to be much less powerful than was formerly supposed; it does not

give new knowledge, except as to new forms of words for stating truths in

some sense already known. In the fourth place, the methods of inference that

may  be  called  in  a  broad  sense  “inductive”  have  never  been  satisfactorily

formulated;  when  formulated,  even  if  completely  true,  they  only  give

probability to their conclusions; moreover, in any possibly accurate form, they

lack self-evidence, and are only to be believed, if at all, because they seem

indispensable in reaching conclusions that we all accept.

  There  are,  broadly  speaking,  three  ways  that  have  been  suggested  for

coping with the difficulties in defining “knowledge”. The first, and oldest, is to

emphasize  the  concept  of  “self-evidence”.  The  second  is  to  abolish  the

distinction between premisses and conclusions, and to say that knowledge is

constituted by the coherence of a whole body of beliefs. The third and most

drastic is to abandon the concept of “knowledge” altogether and substitute

“beliefs that promote success”—and here “success” may perhaps be interpreted

biologically. We may take Descartes, Hegel, and Dewey as protagonists of

these three points of view.

  Descartes holds that whatever I conceive clearly and distinctly is true. He

believes  that,  from  this  principle,  he  can  derive  not  only  logic  and

metaphysics, but also matters of fact, at least in theory. Empiricism has madesuch a view impossible; we do not think that even the utmost clarity in our

thoughts would enable us to demonstrate the existence of Cape Horn. But this

does not dispose of the concept of “self-evidence”: we may say that what he

says applies to conceptual evidence, but that there is also perceptual evidence,

by means of which we come to know matters of fact. I do not think we can

entirely dispense with self-evidence. If you slip on a piece of orange peel and

hit your head with a bump on the pavement, you will have little sympathy

with a philosopher who tries to persuade you that it is uncertain whether you

are hurt. Self-evidence also makes you accept the argument that if all men are

mortal and Socrates is a man, then Socrates is mortal. I do not know whether

self-evidence is anything except a certain firmness of conviction; the essence

of it is that, where it is present, we cannot help believing. If, however, self-

evidence  is  to  be  accepted  as  a  guarantee  of  truth,  the  concept  must  be

carefully distinguished from others that have a subjective resemblance to it. I

think we must bear it in mind as relevant to the definition of “knowledge”, but

as not in itself sufficient.

  Another difficulty about self-evidence is that it is a matter of degree. A

clap of thunder is indubitable, but a very faint noise is not; that you are seeing

the sun on a bright day is self-evident, but a vague blur in a fog may be

imaginary;  a  syllogism  in Barbara  is  obvious,  but  a  difficult  step  in  a

mathematical argument may be very hard to “see”. It is only for the highest

degree of self-evidence that we should claim the highest degree of certainty.

  The coherence theory and the instrumentalist theory are habitually set

forth by their advocates as theories of truth. As such they are open to certain

objections which I have urged elsewhere. I am considering them now, not as

theories of truth, but as theories of knowledge. In this form there is more to be

said for them.

  Let us ignore Hegel, and set forth the coherence theory of knowledge for

ourselves. We shall have to say that sometimes two beliefs cannot both be

true, or, at least, that we sometimes believe this. If I believe simultaneously

that A is true, that B is true, and that A and B cannot both be true, I have

three beliefs which do not form a coherent group. In that case at least one of

the  three  must  be  mistaken.  The  coherence  theory  in  its  extreme  formmaintains that there is only one possible group of mutually coherent beliefs,

which constitutes the whole of knowledge and the whole of truth. I do not

believe this; I hold, rather, to Leibniz’s multiplicity of possible worlds. But in a

modified form the coherence theory can be accepted. In this modified form it

will say that all, or nearly all, of what passes for knowledge is in a greater or

less degree uncertain; that, if principles of inference are among the prima facie

materials of knowledge, then one piece of prima facie knowledge may be

inferrible from another, and thus acquires more credibility than it had on its

own account. It may thus happen that a body of propositions, each of which

has only a moderate degree of credibility on its own account, may collectively

have a very high degree of credibility. But this argument depends upon the

possibility of varying degrees of intrinsic credibility, and is therefore not a

pure coherence theory. I shall consider this matter in more detail in Part V.

  With respect to the theory that we should substitute for “knowledge” the

concept  “beliefs  that  promote  success”,  it  is  sufficient  to  point  out  that  it

derives  whatever  plausibility  it  may  possess  from  being  half-hearted.  It

assumes that we can know (in the old-fashioned sense) what beliefs promote

success, for if we cannot know this the theory is useless in practice, whereas

its  purpose  is  to  glorify  practice  at  the  expense  of  theory.  In  practice,

obviously, it is often very difficult to know what beliefs promote success, even

if we have an adequate definition of “success”.

  The conclusion to which we seem to be driven is that knowledge is a

matter of degree. The highest degree is found in facts of perception, and in the

cogency  of  very  simple  arguments.  The  next  highest  degree  is  in  vivid

memories.  When  a  number  of  beliefs  are  each  severally  in  some  degree

credible, they become more so if they are found to cohere as a logical whole.

General principles of inference, whether deductive or inductive, are usually

less obvious than many of their instances, and are psychologically derivative

from apprehension of their instances. Towards the end of our inquiry I shall

return to the definition of “knowledge”, and shall then attempt to give more

precision  and  articulation  to  the  above  suggestions.  Meanwhile  let  us

remember that the question “what do we mean by ‘knowledge’?” is not one to

which there is a definite and unambiguous answer, any more than to thequestion “what do we mean by ‘baldness’?”                                      part III


                      Science and Perception                                Introduction


WE come now to an inquiry which proceeds in the opposite order from that of

our initial survey of the universe. In that survey we were attempting to be as

far as possible impartial and impersonal; it was our aim to come as near as our

capacities permit to describing the world as it might appear to an observer of

miraculous perceptive powers viewing it from without. We were concerned

with what we know rather than with what we know. We attempted to use an

order in our description which ignored, for the moment, the fact that we are

part of the universe, and that any account which we can give of it depends

upon  its  effects  upon  ourselves,  and  is  to  this  extent  inevitably

anthropocentric.  We  accordingly  began  with  the  system  of  galaxies,  and

passed on, by stages, to our own galaxy, our own little solar system, our own

tiny planet, the infinitesimal specks of life upon its surface, and finally, as the

climax of insignificance, the bodies and minds of those odd beings that have

imagined themselves the lords of creation and the end and aim of the whole

vast cosmos.

  But this survey, which seems to end in the pettiness of Man and all his

concerns, is only one side of the truth. There is another side, which must be

brought out by a survey of a different kind. In this second kind of survey,

which is now to occupy our attention, we ask no longer what the universe is,

but how we come to know whatever we do know about it. In this survey Man

again occupies the centre, as in the Ptolemaic astronomy. What we know of

the world we know by means of events in our own lives, events which, but for

the power of thought, would remain merely private. The little dots that an

astronomer sees on a photographic plate are to him signs of vast galaxies

separated  from  him  by  hundreds  of  thousands  of  light-years.  All  the

immensities of space and all the abysses of time are mirrored in his thought,

which, in a sense, is as vast as they are. Nothing is too great or too small for

his intellect to comprehend, nothing is too distant in time or space for him to

assign to it its due weight in the structure of the cosmos. In power he is nearlyas feeble as his minuteness suggests, but in contemplation he is boundless, and

the equal of all that he can understand.

  It is my purpose in the following Parts to discuss, first our data, and then

the relation of science to the crude material of experience. The data from

which  scientific  inferences  proceed  are  private  to  ourselves;  what  we  call

“seeing  the  sun”  is  an  event  in  the  life  of  the  seer,  from  which  the

astronomer’s sun has to be inferred by a long and elaborate process. It is

evident that, if the world were a higgledy-piggledy chaos, inferences of this

kind would be impossible; but for causal interconnectedness, what happens in

one place would afford no indication of what has happened in another, and

my experiences would tell me nothing of events outside my own biography. It

is the process from private sensation and thought to impersonal science that

will now concern us. The road is long and rugged, and the goal must be kept

in view if the journey is not to seem wearisome. But until we have traversed

this road neither the scope nor the essential limitations of human knowledge

can be adequately understood.

  The  inferences  upon  which  we  implicitly  rely  in  this  investigation,  of

which the explicit logic will be considered in Part VI, differ from those of

deductive  logic  and  mathematics  in  being  not  demonstrative,  i.e.  in  being

inferences which, when the premisses are true and the reasoning correct, do

not  insure  the  truth  of  the  conclusion,  though  they  are  held  to  make  the

conclusion  “probable”  in  some  sense  and  in  some  degree.  Except  in

mathematics, almost all the inferences upon which we actually rely are of this

sort.  In  some  cases  the  inference  is  so  strong  as  to  amount  to practical

certainty. A page of typescript which makes sense is assumed to have been

typed  by  someone,  although,  as  Eddington  points  out,  it  may  have  been

produced accidentally by a monkey walking on a typewriter, and this bare

possibility  makes  the  inference  to  an  intentional  typist  non-demonstrative.

Many  inferences  which  are  accepted  by  all  men  of  science  are  much  less

nearly certain, for instance, the theory that sound is transmitted by waves.

There  is  a  gradation  in  the  probability  assigned  to  different  inferences  by

scientific common sense, but there is no accepted body of principles according

to which such probabilities are to be estimated. I should wish, by analysingscientific  procedure,  to  systematize  the  rules  of  such  inference.  The  ideal

would be the kind of systematization which has been achieved in relation to

deductive logic.

  It has been customary to regard all inference as deductive or inductive,

and to regard probable inference as synonymous with inductive inference. I

believe that, if ordinarily accepted scientific inferences are to be accepted as

valid, we shall have need of other principles in addition to induction if not in

place of it.

  We may take three questions as typical of those that I wish to investigate.

These three are as to the best available grounds for believing: (1) that the

world existed yesterday, (2) that the sun will rise to-morrow, (3) that there are

sound-waves.  I  am  not  asking  whether  these  beliefs  are  true,  but  what,

assuming them true, are the best reasons for believing them. And generally:

why should we believe things asserted by science but not verified by present

perception? The answer, if I am not mistaken, is by no means simple.                                          I 


Knowledge of Facts and Knowledge of Laws


WHEN we examine our beliefs as to matters of fact, we find that they are

sometimes based directly on perception or memory, while in other cases they

are inferred. To common sense this distinction presents little difficulty: the

beliefs that arise immediately from perception appear to it indubitable, and

the inferences, though they may sometimes be wrong, are thought, in such

cases, to be fairly easily rectified except where peculiarly dubious matters are

concerned. I know of the existence of my friend Mr. Jones because I see him

frequently: in his presence I know him by perception, and in his absence by

memory. I know of the existence of Napoleon because I have heard and read

about him, and I have every reason to believe in the veracity of my teachers. I

am somewhat less certain about Hengist and Horsa, and much less certain

about Zoroaster, but these uncertainties are still on a common-sense level, and

do not seem, at first sight, to raise any philosophical issue.

  This  primitive  confidence,  however,  was  lost  at  a  very  early  stage  in

philosophical speculation, and was lost for sound reasons. It was found that

what  I  know  by  perception  is  less  than  has  been  thought,  and  that  the

inferences by which I pass from perceived to unperceived facts are open to

question. Both these sources of scepticism must be investigated.

  There is, to begin with, a difficulty as to what is inferred and what is not. I

spoke a moment ago of my belief in Napoleon as an inference from what I

have heard and read, but there is an important sense in which this is not quite

true. When a child is being taught history, he does not argue: “My teacher is a

person of the highest moral character, paid to teach me facts; my teacher says

there was such a person as Napoleon; therefore probably there was such a

person.” If he did, he would retain considerable doubt, since his evidence of

the teacher’s moral character is likely to be inadequate, and in many countries

at many times teachers have been paid to teach the opposite of facts. The child

in fact, unless he hates the teacher, spontaneously believes what he is told.When we are told anything emphatically or authoritatively, it is an effort not

to believe it, as any one can experience on April Fools’ day. Nevertheless there

is still a distinction, even on a common-sense level, between what we are told

and what we know for ourselves. If you say to the child “how do you know

about Napoleon?” the child may say “because my teacher told me”. If you say

“how do you know your teacher told you”? the child may say “why, of course,

because I heard her”. If you say “how do you know you heard her”? he may

say “because I remember it distinctly”. If you say “how do you know you

remember it”? he will either lose his temper or say “well, I do remember it”.

Until you reach this point, he will defend his belief as to a matter of fact by

belief in another matter of fact, but in the end he reaches a belief for which he

can give no further reason.

  There is thus a distinction between beliefs that arise spontaneously and

beliefs for which no further reason can be given. It is the latter class of beliefs

that  are  of  most  importance  for  theory  of  knowledge,  since  they  are  the

indispensable minimum of premisses for our knowledge of matters of fact.

Such beliefs I shall call “data”. In ordinary thinking they are causes of other

beliefs rather than premisses from which other beliefs are inferred; but in a

critical  scrutiny  of  our  beliefs  as  to  matters  of  fact  we  must,  wherever

possible,  translate  the  causal  transitions  of  primitive  thinking  into  logical

transitions, and only accept the derived beliefs to the extent that the character

of the transitions seems to justify. For this there is a common-sense reason,

namely, that every such transition is found to involve some risk of error, and

therefore data are more nearly certain than beliefs derived from them. I am

not contending that data are ever completely certain, nor is this contention

necessary for their importance in theory of knowledge.

  There is a long history of discussions as to what was mistakenly called

“scepticism of the senses”. Many appearances are deceptive. Things seen in a

mirror  may  be  thought  to  be  “real”.  In  certain  circumstances,  people  see

double. The rainbow seems to touch the ground at some point, but if you go

there you do not find it. Most noteworthy in this connection are dreams:

however vivid they may have been, we believe, when we wake up, that the

objects which we thought we saw were illusory. But in all these cases the coreof data is not illusory, but only the derived beliefs. My visual sensations, when

I look in a mirror or see double, are exactly what I think they are. Things at

the foot of the rainbow do really look coloured. In dreams I have all the

experiences that I seem to have; it is only things outside my mind that are not

as I believe them to be while I am dreaming. There are in fact no illusions of

the senses, but only mistakes in interpreting sensational data as signs of things

other than themselves. Or, to speak more exactly, there is no evidence that

there are illusions of the senses.

  Every  sensation  which  is  of  a  familiar  kind  brings  with  it  various

associated beliefs and expectations. When (say) we see and hear an aeroplane,

we do not merely have a visual sensation and the auditory sensation of a

whirring noise; spontaneously and without conscious thought we interpret

what we see and hear and fill it out with customary adjuncts. To what an

extent we do this becomes obvious when we make a mistake, for example

when what we thought was an aeroplane turns out to be a bird. I knew a road,

along which I used often to go in a car, which had a bend at a certain place,

and a white-washed wall straight ahead. At night it was very difficult not to

see the wall as a road going straight on up a hill. The right interpretation as a

house and the wrong interpretation as an up-hill road were both, in a sense,

inferences from the sensational datum, but they were not inferences in the

logical sense, since they occurred without any conscious mental process.

  I  give  the  name  “animal  inference”  to  the  process  of  spontaneous

interpretation  of  sensations.  When  a  dog  hears  himself  called  in  tones  to

which  he  is  accustomed,  he  looks  round  and  runs  in  the  direction  of  the

sound. He may be deceived, like the dog looking into the gramophone in the

advertisement of “His Master’s Voice”. But since inferences of this sort are

generated by the repeated experiences that give rise to habit, his inference

must be one which has usually been right in his past life, since otherwise the

habit would not have been generated. We thus find ourselves, when we begin

to reflect, expecting all sorts of things that in fact happen, although it would

be logically possible for them not to happen in spite of the occurrence of the

sensations which give rise to the expectations. Thus reflection upon animal

inference gives us an initial store of scientific laws, such as “dogs bark”. Theseinitial laws are usually somewhat unreliable, but they help us to take the first

steps towards science.

  Every-day  generalizations,  such  as  “dogs  bark”,  come  to  be  explicitly

believed after habits have been generated which might be described as a pre-

verbal  form  of  the  same  belief.  What  sort  of  habit  is  it  that  comes  to  be

expressed in the words “dogs bark”? We do not expect them to bark at all

times, but we do expect that, if they make a noise, it will be a bark or a growl.

Psychologically, induction does not proceed as it does in the text-books, where

we  are  supposed  to  have  observed  a  number  of  occasions  on  which  dogs

barked, and then proceeded consciously to generalize. The fact is that the

generalization, in the form of a habit of expectation, occurs at a lower level

than that of conscious thought, so that, when we begin to think consciously,

we find ourselves believing the generalization, not, explicitly, on the basis of

the evidence, but as expressing what is implicit in our habit of expectation.

This is a history of the belief, not a justification of it.

  Let us make this state of affairs somewhat more explicit. First comes the

repeated experience of dogs barking, then comes the habit of expecting a bark,

then, by giving verbal expression to the habit, comes belief in the general

proposition “dogs bark”. Last comes the logician, who asks, not “why do I

believe this”? but “what reason is there for supposing this true”? Clearly the

reason,  if  any,  must  consist  of  two  parts:  first,  the  facts  of  perception

consisting  of  the  various  occasions  on  which  we  have  heard  dogs  bark;

second, some principle justifying generalization from observed instances to a

law. But this logical process comes historically after, not before, our belief in a

host of common-sense generalizations.

  The translation of animal inferences into verbal generalizations is carried

out very inadequately in ordinary thinking, and even in the thinking of many

philosophers. In what counts as perception of external objects there is much

that consists of habits generated by past experience. Take, for example, our

belief in the permanence of objects. When we see a dog or a cat, a chair or a

table, we do not suppose that we are seeing something which has a merely

momentary existence; we are convinced that what we are seeing has a past

and a future of considerable duration. We do not think this about everythingthat  we  see;  a  flash  of  lightning,  a  rocket,  or  a  rainbow  is  expected  to

disappear quickly. But experience has generated in us the expectation that

ordinary solid objects, which can be touched as well as seen, usually persist,

and can be seen and touched again on suitable occasions. Science reinforces

this  belief  by  explaining  away  apparent  disappearances  as  transformations

into gaseous forms. But the belief in quasi-permanence, except in exceptional

cases, antedates the scientific doctrine of the indestructibility of matter, and is

itself antedated by the animal expectation that common objects can be seen

again if we look in the right place.

  The filling out of the sensational core by means of animal inferences, until

it  becomes  what  is  called  “perception”,  is  analogous  to  the  filling  out  of

telegraphic press messages in newspaper offices. The reporter telegraphs the

one  word  “King”,  and  the  newspaper  prints  “His  Gracious  Majesty  King

George VI”. There is some risk of error in this proceeding, since the reporter

may have been relating the doings of Mr. Mackenzie King. It is true that the

context  would  usually  reveal  such  an  error,  but  one  can  imagine

circumstances  in  which  it  would  not.  In  dreams,  we  fill  out  the  bare

sensational message wrongly, and only the context of waking life shows us

our mistake.

  The  analogy  to  abbreviated  press  telegrams  is  very  close.  Suppose,  for

instance, you see a friend at the window of an incoming train, and a little later

you see him coming towards you on the platform. The physical causes of your

perceptions  (and  of  your  interpretation  of  them)  are  certain  light-signals

passing between him and your eyes. All that physics, by itself, entitles you to

infer from the receipt of these signals is that, somewhere along the line of

sight,  light  of  the  appropriate  colours  has  been  emitted  or  reflected  or

refracted  or  scattered.  It  is  obvious  that  the  kind  of  ingenuity  which  has

produced the cinema could cause you to have just these sensations in the

absence of your friend, and that in that case you would be deceived. But such

sources of deception cannot be frequent, or at least cannot have been frequent

hitherto,  since,  if  they  were,  you  would  not  have  formed  the  habits  of

expectation and belief in context that you have in fact formed. In the case

supposed,  you  are  confident  that  it  is  your  friend,  that  he  has  existed